                                                   A GEOMETRIC EMBEDDING FOR STANDARD ANALYTIC
                                                                    MODULES
arXiv:math/0503646v3 [math.RT] 11 Jun 2007




                                                                                       TIM BRATTEN

                                                    Abstract. In this manuscript we make a general study of the representations realized,
                                                    for a reductive Lie group of Harish-Chandra class, on the compactly supported sheaf
                                                    cohomology groups of an irreducible finite-rank polarized homogeneous vector bundle
                                                    defined in a generalized complex flag space. In particular, we show that the represen-
                                                    tations obtained are minimal globalizations of Harish-Chandra modules and that there
                                                    exists a whole number q, depending only on the orbit, such that all cohomologies van-
                                                    ish in degree less than q. The representation realized on the q-th cohomology group is
                                                    called a standard analytic module. Our main result is a geometric proof that a stan-
                                                    dard analytic module embeds naturally in an associated standard module defined on the
                                                    full flag space of Borel subalgebras. As an application, we give geometric realizations
                                                    for irreducible submodules of some principal series representations in case the group is
                                                    complex.




                                                                                    1. Introduction
                                                Even though the irreducible admissible representations of a real reductive Lie group
                                             have been classified for about 30 years, one does not yet have an explicit realization of
                                             these representations. Historically speaking, two of the first constructions of admissi-
                                             ble representations were the parabolically induced modules and Schmid’s realization of
                                             the discrete series [12], generalizing the Borel-Weil-Bott Theorem [3]. Developed in the
                                             1980s, the localization technique of Beilinson and Bernstein [1] gave a general prescription
                                             for realizing irreducible Harish-Chandra modules. However, when the irreducible repre-
                                             sentation is not obtained as a standard module, it can be quite difficult to understand
                                             the corresponding geometric realization. Since a specific criteria for the irreducibility of
                                             some standard modules is known [10], the Beilinson-Bernstein result does obtain a con-
                                             crete realization for many irreducible representations, although the object produced is a
                                             Harish-Chandra module and not a group representation. Using the methods of analytic
                                             localization, Hecht and Taylor gave an analytic version of the Beilinson-Bernstein theory
                                             [6], including a concrete construction of standard modules that yields full-fledged group
                                             representations globalizing the standard Beilinson-Bernstein modules. The standard ana-
                                             lytic modules defined by Hecht and Taylor are realized on the compactly supported sheaf
                                             cohomology groups of polarized homogeneous vector bundles. One knows that their con-
                                             struction is sufficiently general, for example, to provide geometric realizations for all the
                                             tempered representations.
                                                The Hecht-Taylor construction is directly related to the geometry of a full flag space.
                                             In order to realize more irreducible representations, in this manuscript we consider the
                                             natural generalization of their construction to the setting of an arbitrary flag space. Ex-
                                             amples show that, because of certain geometric conditions on the orbits, the underlying
                                             Harish-Chandra module of this natural generalization is not universally described by the
                                             analog of a standard Beilinson-Bernstein module. In fact, generally speaking, one knows
                                                                                               1
2                                      TIM BRATTEN

little about the underlying Harish-Chandra module. Alternatively, what we propose to
establish is an embedding theorem, showing in general that the standard analytic modules
appear naturally as submodules of certain standard modules defined in a full flag space.
In particular, the standard analytic modules defined in an arbitrary flag space appear as
refinements to certain standard modules occurring in the Beilinson-Bernstein classifica-
tion scheme. Our main results along these lines are Theorems 4.1 and 4.3, appearing in
Section 4. In particular, the embedding in Theorem 4.1 applies to any finite-rank, irre-
ducible polarized homogeneous vector bundle defined in a complex flag space. Theorem
4.3 adds a nonvanishing result when an additional hypothesis is assumed. In the last
section, as an example, we will apply the embedding to realize irreducible submodules of
certain principal series in the case of a complex reductive group.
   The paper is organized as follows. The first section is the introduction. In the second
section we introduce the complex flag spaces and the polarized homogeneous vector bun-
dles. A main result is the construction of the associated bundle. In the third section we
deal with some topological considerations, introduce the minimal globalization [11] and
show that representations obtained on the compactly supported sheaf cohomology groups
of a polarized homogeneous vector bundle are naturally isomorphic to minimal globaliza-
tions of Harish-Chandra modules. We also establish a vanishing result. In section 4 we
prove Theorems 4.1 and 4.3 as mentioned previously. In section 5 we apply our result
to realize irreducible subrepresentations of some principal series in the case of a complex
reductive group.

                   2. Polarized Homogeneous Vector Bundle
We let G0 denote a reductive Lie group of Harish-Chandra class with Lie algebra g0 and
complexified Lie algebra g. G denotes the complex adjoint group of g. This notation is a
bit misleading, since the adjoint representation defines an isomorphism between the Lie
algebra of G and [g, g].
Flag Spaces for G0 . We define a flag space for G0 to be a complex projective, homo-
geneous G−space. The flag spaces can be constructed as follows. By definition, a Borel
subalgebra of g is a maximal solvable subalgebra. One knows that G acts transitively
on the set of Borel subalgebras and that the resulting homogeneous space is a complex
projective variety called the full flag space for G0 . A complex subalgebra that contains
a Borel subalgebra is called a parabolic subalgebra of g. The space of G−conjugates to a
given parabolic subalgebra is a complex projective variety, and each flag space is realized
in this way.
   From the construction it follows that points in the flag spaces are identified with par-
abolic subalgebras of g. Let X denote the full flag space and suppose Y is a flag space.
Given x ∈ X and y ∈ Y we let bx and py denote, respectively, the corresponding Borel
and parabolic subalgebras. For each x ∈ X it is known there is a unique y ∈ Y such that
bx ⊆ py . Thus there is a unique G−equivariant projection
                                        π:X→Y
called the natural projection.
  We note that the quantity of G0 −orbits in Y is finite [13]. In particular, G0 −orbits are
locally closed in Y and define regular analytic submanifolds.
                                A GEOMETRIC EMBEDDING                                       3

The Cartan Dual and Infinitesimal Characters. Suppose x is a point in the full
flag space X and let nx denote the nilradical of the corresponding Borel subalgebra bx .
Put
                                      hx = bx /nx
and let h∗x denote the complex dual of hx . Since the stabilizer of x in G acts trivially on
h∗x the corresponding G−homogeneous holomorphic vector bundle on X is trivial. Thus
the space h∗ of global sections is isomorphic h∗x via the the evaluation at x. We refer to h∗
as the Cartan dual for g. If c is a Cartan subalgebra of g contained in bx then projection
of c onto hx coupled with evaluation at x defines an isomorphism of h∗ onto c∗ called the
specialization of h∗ onto c∗ at x. Using the specializations we can identify a root subset
                                           Σ ⊆ h∗
for g in h∗ and a set of positive roots Σ+ ⊆ Σ where a root is called positive if it is
identified with a root of c in bx . The given subsets are independent of the specialization
                                                                                       ∨
used to define them. For α ∈ Σ and λ ∈ h∗ we can also define the complex values α(λ)
and a corresponding Weyl group W of g in h∗ . λ ∈ h∗ is called regular if the stabilizer
of λ in W is trivial. We say that λ is antidominant provided
                          ∨
                               / {1, 2, 3, . . .} for each α ∈ Σ+ .
                          α(λ) ∈
  Let U(g) denote the enveloping algebra of g and let Z(g) denote the center of U(g).
Then a g−infinitesimal character is a homomorphism of algebras
                                       Θ : Z(g) → C.
A well known result of Harish-Chandra identifies the set of g−infinitesimal characters
with the quotient
                                     h∗ /W .
Suppose Θ is an infinitesimal character and λ ∈ h∗ . Then we write Θ = W · λ when
Harish-Chandra’s correspondence identifies Θ with the Weyl group orbit of λ in h∗ .
  Let Y be a flag space and suppose y ∈ Y . We let py denote the corresponding parabolic
subalgebra and let uy denote the nilradical of py . The corresponding Levi quotient is
defined by
                                      ly = py /uy .
Thus ly is a complex reductive Lie algebra. In fact, the natural projection identifies the
Borel subalgebras of g contained in py with the Borel subalgebras of ly . In this way, we
can identify h∗ with the Cartan dual for ly . Therefore we have a corresponding set of
roots
                                        ΣY ⊆ Σ
for h∗ in ly and a Weyl group for the Levi quotient WY ⊆ W generated by reflections from
the roots in ΣY . As the notation suggests, these subsets are independent of the point y.
The positive roots Σ+      ∗
                     Y of h in ly are defined by

                                      Σ+         +
                                       Y = ΣY ∩ Σ .

An element λ ∈ h∗ is called antidominant for Y provided there exists an element w ∈ WY
                                                                  ∨
such that w · λ is antidominant. An equivalent condition is that α(λ) not be a positive
4                                      TIM BRATTEN

integer for each α ∈ Σ+ − Σ+    Y . Finally we note that the Harish-Chandra parametrization
identifies set of ly −infinitesimal characters with the set of Weyl group orbits
                                         h∗ /WY .

Polarized Modules for the Stabilizer. Suppose Y is a flag space. Fix y ∈ Y . We
have the parabolic subalgebra py with nilradical uy and Levi quotient ly . Let G0 [y] denote
the stabilizer of y in G0 . Suppose
                                    ω : G0 [y] → GL(V )
is a representation in a finite-dimensional complex vector space V . A compatible repre-
sentation of py in V is called a polarization if the nilradical uy acts trivially. We note
that a polarization need not exist, even if the G0 [y]−module V is irreducible. However
a polarization is unique when it does exist, because the compatibility condition assures
that two possibly distinct ly −actions agree on a parabolic subalgebra of ly and therefore
are identical.
   Since a G0 [y]−invariant subspace of a polarized module need not be invariant under
the corresponding ly −action, we define a morphism of polarized modules to be a linear
map that intertwines both the G0 [y] and ly −action. Thus the category of polarized
G0 [y]−modules is nothing but the category of finite-dimensional (ly , G0 [y])−modules.
   We briefly consider the structure of an irreducible polarized module V . Since G0 is
Harish-Chandra class it follows that V has an ly −infinitesimal character. Since there is
only one finite-dimensional irreducible ly −module with a given infinitesimal character, it
follows that V is a direct sum of several copies of an irreducible highest weight module.
In fact, if one makes a linear assumption on the group G0 , then an irreducible polar-
ized module is nothing but an irreducible finite-dimensional ly −module with compatible
G0 [y]−action.

Polarized Homogeneous Vector Bundle. By definition, a polarized homogeneous
vector bundle is a homogeneous analytic vector bundle that comes equipped with a
canonical way to define the notion of a restricted holomorphic section. By definition
these restricted holomorphic sections form the corresponding sheaf of polarized sections.
For example, in the case of a trivial line bundle, the polarized sections are exactly the
restricted holomorphic functions.
  Let S be a G0 −orbit and fix y ∈ S. Suppose
                                    ω : G0 [y] → GL(V )
is a polarized module for the stabilizer G0 [y]. For ξ ∈ py and v ∈ V , we use the notation
                                           ω(ξ)v
to indicate the compatible py −action. Let
                                             V
                                             ↓
                                             S
be the G0 −homogeneous vector bundle with fiber V and let
                      φ : G0 → S    be the projection φ(g) = g · y.
                                 A GEOMETRIC EMBEDDING                                        5

Then a we can identify a section of V over an open set U ⊆ S with a real analytic function
              f : φ−1 (U) → V such that f (gp) = ω(p−1 )f (g) ∀p ∈ G0 [y].
The section is said to be polarized if
                  d                           d
                     |t=0 f (g exp(tξ 1 )) + i |t=0 f (g exp(tξ 2 )) = −ω(ξ 1 + iξ 2 )f (g)
                  dt                          dt
for all ξ 1 , ξ 2 ∈ g0 such that ξ 1 + iξ 2 ∈ py .
   Let P(y, V ) denote the sheaf of polarized sections and let OY |S be the sheaf of restricted
holomorphic functions on S. As a sheaf of OY |S −modules, P(y, V ) is locally isomorphic
to OY |S ⊗V [6]. The left translation defines a G0 , and thus a g−action on P(y, V ).
We will be interested in the representations obtained on the compactly supported sheaf
cohomologies
                                    Hcp (S, P(y, V )) p = 0, 1, 2, . . .
One knows that the sheaf cohomologies are dual nuclear Fréchet (DNF) g−modules with
a compatible G0 −action, provided certain naturally defined topologies are Hausdorff [6].
The Associated Bundle. Let S be a G0 −orbit and suppose
                                              V
                                              ↓
                                              S
is the homogeneous polarized vector bundle corresponding to an irreducible polarized
module for the stabilizer. We let P(V) denote the corresponding sheaf of polarized sec-
tions. Let X denote the full flag space and let
                                         π:X→Y
be the natural projection. Put
                                        N = π −1 (S)
the associated manifold. In order to study the compactly supported cohomologies of P(V),
we now define a certain G0 −equivariant bundle over N that comes naturally equipped
with a corresponding polarization.
  For y ∈ S we let Vy denote the fiber of V over y. Thus Vy is an irreducible polarized
module for the stabilizer G0 [y]. Put
                                       Xy = π −1 ({y})
and let x ∈ Xy . Define
                                                Vy
                                         Wx =
                                               nx Vy
where nx is the nilradical of the Borel subalgebra bx . Thus Wx is an irreducible polarized
module for G0 [x]. Let W be the bundle over N given by
                                             [
                                        W=       Wx .
                                              x∈N
To provide the corresponding trivializations, we define a holomorphic extension of W
over a neighborhood of x in X. Since our result is local, we may assume that G0 is
a real form of G. Let Bx denote the stabilizer of x in G. Then the representation of
bx in Wx determines a local holomorphic representation of Bx in Wx . The standard
construction of a G−homogeneous holomorphic vector bundle limited to an appropriate
6                                       TIM BRATTEN

neighborhood of the identity in G then provides the desired holomorphic extension of W
over a neighborhood of x in X.
   We now consider the polarized sections. For ξ ∈ g0 and σ an analytic section of W
defined on an open set U ⊆ N , put
                                  d
                     (ξ ∗ σ)(x) =    |t=0 exp(tξ)σ(exp(−tξ)x), x ∈ U
                                  dt
where we use juxtaposition to indicate the action of G0 on W. This definition determines
a unique complex linear action of g on the sheaf of analytic sections of W. The section σ
is said to be polarized if
                 (ξ ∗ σ)(x) = ω x (ξ)σ(x) for each x ∈ U and each ξ ∈ bx
where ω x indicates the bx −action on the fiber. In case
                                         f :U →C
is a real analytic function, observe that
                                d
                  (ξ ∗ f )(x) =    |t=0 f (exp(−tξ)x), x ∈ U and ξ ∈ g0 .
                                dt
Let P(W) denote the sheaf of polarized sections and let OX |N be the sheaf of restricted
holomorphic functions on N. The following lemma will be used to show that P(W) is a
locally free sheaf of OX |N −modules.
Lemma 2.1. Suppose U is open in N and let
                                         f :U →C
be an analytic function. Then f is a restricted holomorphic function if and only if
                      (ξ ∗ f )(x) = 0   for each x ∈ U and ξ ∈ bx .
Proof: If f is a restricted holomorphic function it is clear that f satisfies the equation
in Lemma 2.1. On the other hand, suppose that f satisfies the given equation. We may
assume that G0 is a real form of G. To simplify notation, we assume that f is defined on
all of N. Let Q be a G0 −orbit in N. We first show that there is a holomorphic function
defined on a neighborhood of Q in X that restricts to f on Q. Fix x ∈ Q and consider the
function g 7→ f (gx) defined on G0 . Observe that this function extends to a holomorphic
function ϕ defined on an open set of G. For each g ∈ G0 and each ξ ∈ bgx we have
                                  d
                    (ξ ∗ ϕ)(gx) =    |t=0 ϕ(g exp(−tAd(g −1 )ξ)x) = 0.
                                  dt
Thus, for g in an open set of G containing G0 , we have
                              ϕ(gb) = ϕ(g) for each b ∈ Bx
so that ϕ defines a holomorphic extension of f to a neighborhood of Q in X.
  It follows that there exists a holomorphic function on an open set in X which restricts
to f on a dense open set of N (the union of all the open G0 −orbits). Choose y ∈ π(N)
and put
                                      Xy = π −1 ({y}).
Define
                          ψ : G0 × Xy → C by ψ(g, z) = f (gz).
                                A GEOMETRIC EMBEDDING                                       7

We claim that, for each fixed g, the function z 7→ ϕ(g, z) is holomorphic. By the above
considerations, the given function is holomorphic on a dense open subset of Xy . But
therefore the claim follows, since the given function is annihilated by the ∂-operator the
complex manifold Xy .
  Thus ψ extends to a holomorphic function defined on a neighborhood of G0 × Xy in
G × Xy . Using the same letter ψ to denote the holomorphic extension, observe that for
each ξ ∈ bx and each (g, z) ∈ G0 × Xy we have
                      d                         d
                         |t=0 ψ(g exp(tξ), z) =    |t=0 ψ(g, exp(tξ)z).
                      dt                        dt
Thus, for each b ∈ Bx , we have
                                    ψ(gb, z) = ψ(g, bz).
It follows that ψ defines a holomorphic extension of f to a neighborhood of N in X. 
  From the previous lemma and the chain rule, it follows that if σ is a local polarized
section and f is a restricted polarized section then f σ is a polarized section. We finish
this section with the following proposition.

Proposition 2.2. Fix x ∈ X. As a sheaf of OX |N −modules P(W) is locally isomorphic
to OX |N ⊗Wx .
Proof: Since the result is local, and using the fact W locally extends to a holomorphic
vector bundle, we may assume that W extends to a G−homogeneous vector bundle on all
of X. Let
                       Φ : G → X be the projection Φ(g) = gx
and suppose
                                       η:U →G
is a corresponding holomorphic section defined on a neighborhood U of x in X. We need
to check that an analytic section σ of W is polarized if and only if the function
                                    f (z) = η(z)−1 σ(z)
is holomorphic. Using the differential of the action map
                                       G × Wz → W
we define a multiplication by complex scalars in the tangent space to W at point v ∈ Vz .
Let ξ 1 , ξ 2 ∈ g0 such that ξ = ξ 1 + iξ 2 ∈ bz and put v = σ(z). Since
                           d                      d
                              |t=0 exp(tξ 1 )v + i |t=0 exp(tξ 2 )v = ω(ξ)v
                           dt                     dt
it follows from the product rule that σ satisfies the polarized condition at z if and only if
                        d                            d
                          |t=0 σ(exp(−tξ 1 )z) + i |t=0 σ(exp(−tξ 2 )z) = 0.
                       dt                           dt
Since
                    d                                d
                       |t=0 η(exp(−tξ 1 )z)−1 v + i |t=0 η(exp(−tξ 2 )z)−1 v = 0
                    dt                               dt
the desired result follows from the product rule as applied to the function f . 
  W is called the associated bundle on N.
8                                      TIM BRATTEN

                  3. Topological considerations and vanishing.
   In order to show that the compactly supported sheaf cohomologies of a polarized vector
bundle are minimal globalizations, we will apply some of the results by Hecht and Taylor
for certain topological sheaves of g−modules, with compatible G0 −action [6]. We begin
this section by considering some of those results. The following notations will be adopted.
If S ⊆ Y is a locally closed subspace and F is a sheaf on Y then F |S denotes the restriction
of F to S. If F is a sheaf on S then F Y denotes the extension by zero of F to Y .

DNF Sheaves and Analytic Modules. By definition, a DNF space is a complete,
locally convex topological vector space whose continuous dual, when equipped with the
strong topology is a nuclear Fréchet space. In the obvious fashion, one can define the
notion of a DNF algebra and a corresponding category of DNF modules.
   We will be interested in sheaves with DNF structure. A DNF sheaf of algebras is a
sheaf of algebras such that the space of germs of sections over each compact subset is a
DNF algebra and such that the restriction map for any nested pair of compact subsets
is continuous. When A is a DNF sheaf of algebras, then one can define, in the obvious
fashion a corresponding concept of DNF sheaf of A−modules. A corresponding morphism
is a morphism of sheaves of A−modules that is continuous for all the given topologies.
One can show that the continuity condition is completely determined by continuity on the
stalks. By the open mapping theorem, a continuous sheaf isomorphism has a continuous
inverse. We note that when F is a DNF sheaf of A−modules on Y and S ⊆ Y is a locally
closed subset then (F |S )Y is a DNF sheaf of A−modules supported in S.
   The sheaf O of holomorphic functions is an important example of DNF sheaf of algebras.
Hecht and Taylor show that when F is a sheaf of O−modules whose geometric fibers have
countable dimension and whose stalks are free modules over the stalks of O then F carries
a unique DNF structure consistent with the natural DNF structure that exists on stalks.
With this structure F becomes a DNF sheaf of O−modules.
   Suppose A is a DNF sheaf of algebras on a flag space Y. Since Y is compact the space
of global sections
                                        A = Γ(Y, A)
is a DNF algebra. Let MDNF (A) denote the category of DNF sheaves of A−modules and
let MDNF (A) denote the category of DNF A−modules. Thus the global sections defines a
functor
                                Γ : MDNF (A) → MDNF (A).
Hecht and Taylor, using a modified Čech resolution, show that the category MDNF (A)
has enough Γ−acyclic objects. For M ∈ MDNF (A) they prove that the sheaf cohomology
groups
                                  H p (Y, M) p = 1, 2, . . .
will be also be DNF A−modules, provided the associated topologies are Hausdorff. Indeed,
their construction is functorial and their work shows that the topological properties for
the sheaf cohomologies are independent of the choice of Γ−acyclic resolution, as long as
these resolutions originate from the given category.
   We will be interested in the following DNF sheaves of algebras on Y . To each λ ∈ h∗ ,
Beilinson and Bernstein have shown how to define a twisted sheaf of differential operators
(TDO) on the full flag space X [1]. We let Dλ denote the corresponding TDO with
holomorphic coefficients. With our parametrization, when ρ indicates one-half the sum
                                  A GEOMETRIC EMBEDDING                                     9

of the positive roots in h∗ then D−ρ is the sheaf of holomorphic differential operators on
X. One knows that Dλ is a DNF sheaf of algebras on X. Let
                                         π:X→Y
denote the natural projection and let π ∗ (Dλ ) denote the corresponding direct image in
the category of sheaves. Since X and Y are compact, π ∗ (Dλ ) is a is a DNF sheaf of
algebras on Y . If WY denotes the Weyl group for the Levi quotient then one knows that
π ∗ (Dwλ) ∼
          = π ∗ (Dλ ) for each w ∈ WY .
    To characterize the sheaf cohomologies of π ∗ (Dλ ) we introduce the g−infinitesimal
character Θ = W · λ. Let UΘ be the quotient of U(g) by the ideal generated from the
kernel of Θ. Using the result of Beilinson and Bernstein, Hecht and Taylor show that
                   Γ(Y, π ∗ (Dλ )) ∼
                                   = UΘ and H p (Y, π∗ (Dλ )) = 0 for p > 0.
  Let y ∈ Y and suppose V is an irreducible polarized module for the stabilizer G0 [y]. Let
P(y, V ) denote the corresponding sheaf of polarized sections defined on the G0 −orbit S of
y. Let ly denote the Levi quotient and let λ ∈ h∗ be a parameter for the ly −infinitesimal
character on V . Then P(y, V )Y is a DNF sheaf of π ∗ (Dλ )−modules. Thus the compactly
supported sheaf cohomologies
                            H p (S, P(y, V )) ∼
                              c               = H p (Y, P(y, V )Y )
will be DNF UΘ −modules, provided the corresponding topologies are Hausdorff.
    In order to characterize the G0 −action on Hcp (S, P(y, V )), Hecht and Taylor develop a
formalism for DNF sheaves of π ∗ (Dλ )−modules with compatible analytic G0 −action. The
corresponding objects obtained are referred to as analytic sheaves of (π ∗ (Dλ ), G0 )−modules.
The sheaf P(y, V )Y provides the fundamental example of these sorts of objects. By def-
inition a morphism of analytic sheaves of (π ∗ (Dλ ), G0 )−modules is a morphism of DNF
π ∗ (Dλ )−modules which is equivariant for the G0 −action.
    Suppose M is a DNF UΘ −module equipped with a continuous, linear G0 −action ω. M
is called an analytic (G0 , UΘ )−module if:
  (1) for each v ∈ M the function
                                         g 7→ ω(g)v
is an analytic function from G0 to M
   (2) the derivative of the G0 −action agrees with the g−action.
A morphism of analytic (G0 , UΘ )−modules is a continuous linear map which is equivariant
with respect to the G0 −actions.
  It is clear from definitions that the global sections functor determines a functor from
the category of analytic sheaves of (π ∗ (Dλ ), G0 )−modules to the category of analytic
(G0 , UΘ )−modules. What Hecht and Taylor show with their formalism is that, with
respect to the construction of sheaf cohomology, the analytic group action is functorial,
provided that the sheaf cohomology has a Hausdorff topology.

Minimal Globalization Let K0 ⊆ G0 be a maximal compact subgroup and suppose
M is a Harish-Chandra module for (K0 , g). By definition a globalization Mglob of M is
an admissible representation of G0 in a complete locally convex space whose underlying
subspace of K0 −finite vectors is isomorphic to M as a (K0 , g)−module. By now one knows
that there exist several canonical and functorial globalizations. In this article we shall be
interested in realizing the remarkable minimal globalization, Mmin whose existence was
10                                    TIM BRATTEN

first proved by W. Schmid in [11]. When Mglob is a globalization of M then the inclusion
M → Mglob lifts to a continuous G0 −equivariant linear inclusion
                                      Mmin → Mglob .
This lifting defines an isomorphism of Mmin onto the analytic vectors in a Banach space
globalization [8]. In particular, Mmin is an analytic module. One also knows that the
functor of minimal globalization is exact [8].

Vanishing Number It turns out there is a specific non-negative integer q associated to
a G0 −orbit S, such that the compactly supported sheaf cohomologies of any polarized
homogeneous vector bundle will vanish in degrees less than q, but such that the q−th
cohomology will not vanish for some polarized homogeneous vector bundles on S. This
value q will be called the vanishing number of S.
  In order to define this number, we introduce some definitions and facts related to
the Matsuki duality [9]. Fix a maximal compact subgroup K0 ⊆ G0 and let K be the
complexification of K0 . The group K acts algebraically on Y and the choice of K0
determines an involutive automorphism
                                         θ:g→g
called the Cartan involution of g. A point y ∈ Y is called special if py contains a Cartan
subalgebra c of g such θ(c) = c and such that that g0 ∩ c is a real form for c. A K−orbit
is said to be Matsuki dual to a G0 −orbit if their intersection contains a special point.
Matsuki has shown that each G0 −orbit (each K−orbit) contains a special point and that
K0 acts transitively on the special points in a given G0 −orbit (in a given a K−orbit).
Thus Matsuki duality establishes a one to one correspondence between the G0 −orbits and
the K−orbits in Y . In particular each G0 −orbit has a unique Matsuki dual.
   Let S be a G0 −orbit and let Q be its Matsuki dual. The vanishing number of S is
defined to be the codimension q of Q in Y .

The Compactly Supported Cohomologies of a Polarized Homogeneous Vector
Bundle. We begin this subsection with the following lemma.
Lemma 3.1. Suppose
                                  0→F →G→H→0
is a short exact sequence of analytic sheaves of (π∗ (Dλ ), G0 )-modules on Y . Assume that
for each p, the sheaf cohomology groups H p (Y, F ) and H p (Y, H) are admissible analytic
G0 −modules, isomorphic to the minimal globalizations of their underlying Harish-Chandra
modules. Then the same is true of H p (Y, G).
Proof: Consider the sequence
                          H p−1 (Y, H) → H p (Y, F ) → H p (Y, G).
Since a morphism of minimal globalizations has closed range, it follows that the kernel of
the second morphism is closed in H p (Y, F ). Therefore, by applying [6, Corollary A.11 ]
to the sequence
                             H p (Y, F ) → H p (Y, G) → H p (Y, H)
one deduces that H p (Y, G) is Hausdorff. Thus H p (Y, G) is an analytic G0 −module. Hence
the desired result follows from [6, Lemma 10.11]. 
                                A GEOMETRIC EMBEDDING                                    11

  With respect to the polarized homogeneous vector bundles in the full flag space, one
has the following result.
Proposition 3.2. Suppose X is the full flag space for G0 and S ⊆ X is a G0 -orbit.
Choose a point x ∈ S and suppose V is a polarized module for G0 [x]. Let P(x, V ) denote
the corresponding sheaf of polarized sections. Then we have the following.
(a) For each p = 0, 1, 2, . . . , the compactly supported sheaf cohomology group
                                     Hcp (S, P(x, V ))
is an analytic G0 −module, naturally isomorphic to the minimal globalization of its under-
lying Harish-Chandra module.
(b) Let q denote the vanishing number of S. Then
                             Hcp (S, P(x, V )) = 0 for p < q.
Proof: When V is a polarized module with infinitesimal character, then this result is
proved in [4]. Since the correspondence
                                    W 7−→ P(x, W )X
defines an exact functor from the category of polarized G0 [x]−modules to the category
of analytic sheaves of (π ∗ (Dλ ), G0 )−modules, using the previous lemma, the general case
follows. 
  Fix y ∈ Y , let V be an irreducible polarized module for G0 [y], put S = G0 · y and let
N = π −1 (S) ⊆ X be the associated manifold. In order to study the compactly supported
sheaf cohomologies of the polarized sections P(y, V ) we introduce the associated vector
bundle W, defined on N.
  Suppose y ∈ S is special and let K[y] denote the stabilizer of y in K. Then the duality
between G0 and K−orbits on X descends to a 1-1 correspondence between G0 [y] and
K[y]−orbits on Xy [9]. In particular, there exists a unique closed G0 [y]−orbit on Xy
whose Matsuki dual is the open K[y]−orbit. It follows there is a unique G0 −orbit O ⊆ N
which is closed in N. Observe that the vanishing number of O is equal to the vanishing
number of S. We call O the associated orbit.
  Applying the previous two results we now establish the following.
Lemma 3.3. Fix y ∈ Y , put S = G0 · y and let V be an irreducible polarized module for
G0 [y]. Let W be the associated vector bundle defined on N = π −1 (S) ⊆ X and let PW
denote the corresponding sheaf of polarized sections. Then we have the following.
(a) For each p = 0, 1, 2, . . . , the compactly supported sheaf cohomology group
                                       Hcp (N, PW )
is an analytic G0 −module, naturally isomorphic to the minimal globalization of its under-
lying Harish-Chandra module.
(b) Let q denote the vanishing number of S and let O be the associated orbit in N. Then
                               Hcp (N, PW )) = 0 for p < q
and there exists a natural, G0 −equivariant, continuous linear inclusion
                              Hcq (N, PW ) → Hcq (O, PW |O ).
12                                      TIM BRATTEN

Proof: Put U = N − O and consider the short exact sequence
                          0 → (PW |U )X → PW
                                           X
                                             → (PW |O )X → 0.
Thus (a) follows from the previous two results and the long exact sequence in cohomology
provided we know the result for the sheaf cohomologies of (PW |U )X . By choosing a
second G0 −orbit S2 ⊆ U, that is closed in U and defining U2 = U − S2 we obtain the
exact sequence
                     0 → (PW |U2 )X → (PW |U )X → (PW |S2 )X → 0.
Thus we reduce to the case where U is a G0 −orbit open in N and the result follows by
Proposition 3.2.
  Similar considerations can be used to establish (b). In particular, we only need to add
the observation that if S p is a G0 −orbit contained in U then
                                     dim(O) < dim(S p)
and thus Matsuki duality implies that the vanishing number q p of S p satisfies q p > q. Thus,
where U = N − O, we obtain
                              H p (X, (PW |U )X ) = 0 for p < q
and the desired emdedding is obtained from the long exact sequence in cohomology applied
to the first of the previous two short exact sequences. 
Theorem 3.4. Let Y be a flag space for G0 and suppose y ∈ Y . Let V be a polarized G0 [y]-
module and let P(y, V ) denote the corresponding sheaf of polarized sections. Suppose S is
the G0 -orbit of y and let q denote the vanishing number of S. Then we have the following.
(a) For each p = 0, 1, 2, . . . , the compactly supported sheaf cohomology group
                                      Hcp (S, P(y, V ))
is an admissible analytic G0 -module, naturally isomorphic to the minimal globalization of
its underlying Harish-Chandra module.
(b) Let q denote the vanishing number of S. Then Hcp (S, P(y, V )) vanishes for p < q.
Proof: Using Lemma 3.1 we can reduce to the case where V is irreducible. Let
                                         π:X→Y
be the canonical projection, put N = π−1 (S) and let
                                             W
                                             ↓
                                             N
be the associated vector bundle. Let PW denote the corresponding sheaf of polarized
sections.
  For x ∈ Xy = π −1 ({y}) let bx ⊆ py be the corresponding Borel subalgebra. Let µ be
the element of h∗ that specializes to the the bx −action on V /nx V . Thus µ is the lowest
weight in V and the corresponding ly −infinitesimal character is given by λ = µ − ρ. Thus
P(y, V )Y is an analytic sheaf of (π ∗ (Dλ ), G0 )−modules and PWX
                                                                    is an analytic sheaf of
(Dλ , G0 )−modules.
                                A GEOMETRIC EMBEDDING                                    13

   Observe that the direct image functor π ∗ induces a functor from the category of DNF
sheaves of Dλ −modules to the category of DNF sheaves of π ∗ (Dλ )−modules. More specif-
             X
ically, π ∗ PW is an analytic sheaf of (π ∗ (Dλ ), G0 )−modules. We will deduce Theorem 3.4
from the following lemma.
Lemma 3.5. Maintain the above notations. Then we have the following.
         X ∼
(a) π ∗ PW = P(y, V )Y as an analytic sheaf of (π ∗ (Dλ ), G0 )-modules.            
(b) Let Rp π ∗ denote the p-th derived functor for the direct image. Then Rp π ∗ PW
                                                                                  X
                                                                                      =0
for p > 0.
Proof of the Lemma: Consider the following diagram
                                           i
                                  Xy → N → X
                                   ↓    ↓π  ↓
                                  {y} → S → Y
Since the map π is proper, by standard sheaf cohomology considerations it suffices to
show that
                π ∗ (PW ) ∼
                          = P(y, V ) and that Rp π∗ (PW ) = 0 for p > 0.
To establish the isomorphism π ∗ (PW ) ∼
                                       = P(y, V ), suppose z ∈ S and let Γ(Xz , W |Xz )
denote the global holomorphic sections of the holomorphic vector bundle
                                               W | Xz
                                                ↓
                                                Xz
Let V denote the polarized homogeneous vector bundle over S corresponding to V . Then
there is a canonical isomorphism of polarized G0 [y]−modules
                                  Vy ∼
                                     = Γ(Xy , W | ).       Xy

In particular, if v ∈ Vy and x ∈ Xy then the natural projection of v into
                                                    Vy
                                       Wx =
                                                   nx Vy
determines a global section σ : Xy → W. Using this isomorphism, together with the
natural G0 −action on              [
                                     Γ(Xz , W |Xz )
                                     z∈S
we identify this union with V. Observe that the natural pz −action in Γ(Xz , W |Xz ) cor-
responds to the pz −action on Vz . Suppose U is an open subset of S. We define the
isomorphism from π ∗ (PW ) (U) to P(y, V )(U) as follows. Let σ ∈ π ∗ (PW ) (U) and sup-
pose z ∈ U. Thus the restriction σ |Xz is a global holomorphic section of the bundle
W |Xz . Put
                                γ σ (z) = σ |Xz for z ∈ U.
Then one checks that γ σ is a polarized section of V and that the correspondence
                                               σ 7→ γ σ
defines the desired isomorphism.
   To establish the vanishing, we first note that the sheaf PW is locally free as a sheaf
of OX |N −modules and that the map π is proper. Therefore the desired result can be
14                                     TIM BRATTEN

deduced from the Borel-Weil-Bott theorem and Grauert’s results for the direct image. In
particular, for z ∈ S let OXz denote the sheaf of holomorphic functions on Xz and put
                                           N
                              W(z) = OXz OX |Xz PW |Xz .
Then W(z) is naturally isomorphic to the sheaf of holomorphic sections of the bundle
                                           W | Xz
                                            ↓
                                            Xz
By the Borel-Weil-Bott theorem [3]
                              H P (Xz , W(z)) = 0 for p > 0.
Thus the desired result is deduced by standard techniques from Grauert’s Theorem [2].

   To finish the proof of Theorem 3.4, observe that part (a) follows immediately from
Lemma 3.3, the previous lemma and the Leray spectral sequence. To establish the van-
ishing from part (b), let O be the associated orbit in N. Then Matsuki duality implies
that the vanishing number of O is equal to q. Thus (b) also follows from Lemma 3.3,
Lemma 3.5 and the Leray spectral sequence. 
  When V is an irreducible polarized G0 [y]−module and q is the vanishing number of the
G0 −orbit S = G0 · y then the representation
                                      Hcq (S, P(y, V ))
will be called the standard analytic G0 −module induced from V .

                              4. Geometric Embedding
  Suppose S ⊆ Y is a G0 −orbit and let q denote the vanishing number of S. Choose
y ∈ S and let V be an irreducible polarized module for G0 [y]. We now continue our
analysis of the standard analytic module Hcq (S, P(y, V )).
  Let N = π −1 (S) be the associated manifold and let O be the associated orbit in N.
Thus O has vanishing number q. Choose x ∈ O ∩ Xy and let V /nx V be the corresponding
polarized module for G0 [x]. Then we have the the associated standard analytic module
Hcq (O, P(x, V /nx V )) determined by V .
  The geometric embedding of Hcq (S, P(y, V )) in Hcq (O, P(x, V /nx V )) now follows imme-
diately from our previous analysis.
Theorem 4.1. There exists a natural, G0 −equivariant, continuous linear inclusion
                         Hcq (S, P(y, V )) → Hcq (O, P(x, V /nx V ))
     Proof: Let
                                            W
                                            ↓
                                            N
be the polarized equivariant vector bundle in X determined from V and let PW denote
the sheaf of polarized sections of W. Then
                                   PW |O ∼
                                         = P(x, V /nx V ).
                                 A GEOMETRIC EMBEDDING                                       15

Thus the desired result follows from Lemma 3.3, Lemma 3.5 and the Leray spectral
sequence. 

The Standard Beilinson-Bernstein Modules. In general, not much is known about
the underlying Harish-Chandra module of Hcq (S, P(y, V )). However we can establish non-
vanishing result for Hcq (S, P(y, V )) using information about the Harish-Chandra module
of Hcq (O, P(x, V /nx V )). In order to state and prove the result, we need to utilize the
Beilinson-Bernstein construction of standard Harish-Chandra modules on the full flag
space, which is known to describe the Harish-Chandra module of a standard analytic mod-
ule in that case. We now review some relevant points surrounding the Beilinson-Bernstein
construction. We remark that many sheaves in this section are defined on the topological
space X alg , where X alg denotes the full flag space equipped with the G−invariant Zariski
topology.
   For x ∈ X alg let K[x] denote the stabilizer of x in K. By definition, a polarized algebraic
K[x]−module is a finite dimensional algebraic (K[x], bx )−module such that the nilradical
nx acts trivially. A morphism of polarized algebraic modules is a linear map, equivariant
for both the K[x] and the bx −actions. Suppose that x is special. One knows there exists
a natural equivalence between the categories of polarized algebraic K[x]−modules and
the category of polarized G0 [x]−modules.
   Let λ ∈ h∗ and let Dλalg be the corresponding twisted sheaf of differential operators with
regular coefficients, defined on the algebraic variety X alg . By definition, a Harish-Chandra
sheaf with parameter λ is a coherent sheaf of Dλalg −modules with compatible algebraic
K−action [7]. Let Mcoh (Dλalg , K) denote the corresponding category of Harish-Chandra
sheaves. When M ∈ Mcoh (Dλalg , K) then the sheaf cohomologies
                                H p (X alg , M) p = 0, 1, 2, . . .
are Harish-Chandra modules with infinitesimal character Θ = W · λ.
   Let MHC (UΘ , K) denote the category of Harish-Chandra modules for (g, K) with infin-
itesimal character Θ = W · λ. The global sections defines a functor
                             Γ : Mcoh (Dλalg , K) → MHC (UΘ , K).
Beilinson and Bernstein observed that Γ has the left adjoint
                            ∆λ : MHC (UΘ , K) → Mcoh (Dλalg , K)
given by
                                   ∆λ (M) = Dλalg
                                                     N
                                                        UΘ   M
where M is an object in MHC (UΘ , K) and UΘ = Γ(X alg , Dλalg ). In fact, when λ ∈ h∗ is
antidominant, Beilinson and Bernstein have shown that the functor
                             Γ : Mcoh (Dλalg , K) → MHC (UΘ , K)
is exact and that the adjointness morphism defines an isomorphism between Γ ◦ ∆λ and
the identity functor on MHC (UΘ , K).
   Let ρ be one half the sum of the positive roots and let W be a polarized algebraic
K[x]−module. When bx acts by the specialization of λ + ρ ∈ h∗ then Beilinson and
Bernstein define a corresponding standard Harish-Chandra sheaf
                                  I(x, W ) ∈ Mcoh (Dλalg, K)
16                                      TIM BRATTEN

[7]. Suppose that W is irreducible. Then there is a unique λ ∈ h∗ such that bx acts
by λ + ρ. One knows that I(x, W ) has a unique irreducible Harish-Chandra subsheaf
J (x, W ) ∈ Mcoh (Dλalg , K). Put
             I(x, W ) = Γ(X alg , I(x, W )) and J(x, W ) = Γ(X alg , J (x, W )).
      The pair (x, W ) will be called a classifying data if λ is antidominant and if J(x, W ) 6=
0. When (x, W ) is a classifying data then J(x, W ) is the unique irreducible (g, K)-
submodule of I(x, W ). An exact criteria for when (x, W ) is a classifying data is known
[10].
Lemma 4.2. Suppose that (x, W ) is a classifying data. Let J (x, W ) denote the corre-
sponding irreducible Harish-Chandra sheaf in Mcoh (Dλ , K) and let J(x, W ) be the global
sections of J (x, W ). Suppose K is an object from Mcoh (Dλ , K) contained in ∆λ (J(x, W )),
whose global sections are zero. Then K is contained in the kernel of the adjointness mor-
phism
                                ∆λ (J(x, W )) → J (x, W ).
Proof: Let N denote the kernel of the adjointness morphism. Since J(x, W ) 6= 0, we
have the exact sequence
                         0 → N → ∆λ (J(x, W )) → J (x, W ) → 0.
Since J (x, W ) is irreducible, N is a maximal, K−equivariant subsheaf of coherent Dλ −submodul
in ∆λ (J(x, W )). Since Γ ◦ ∆λ is the identity, the global sections of N are zero. Consider
the sheaf
                                 M = K + N ⊆ ∆λ (J(x, W )).
Then M is a K−equivariant subsheaf of coherent Dλ -submodules of ∆λ (J(x, W )) con-
taining N . Since M has global sections zero, M =     6 ∆λ (J(x, W )). Thus M = N and
K ⊆ N. 
Nonvanishing for the Geometric Embedding. Suppose x ∈ X is special. Then
there is a unique θ−stable Cartan subgroup H0 of G0 contained in G0 [x]. In particular,
if N0 indicates the connected subgroup of G0 [x] with Lie algebra g0 ∩ nx then
                           G0 [x] = H0 · N0 with H0 ∩ N0 = {0} .
Thus a finite-dimensional irreducible polarized representation W of G0 [x] is nothing but a
finite-dimensional irreducible representation of H0 whose derivative we write as λ+ρ ∈ h∗ .
The representation W in turn carries a uniquely compatible structure as an irreducible
polarized algebraic K [x] −module. Let P(x, W ) be the corresponding induced sheaf of
polarized sections on O = G0 · x and put
                                I(x, W ) = Γ(X alg , I(x, W )).
Let q denote the vanishing number of O. Then Hecht and Taylor have shown that
Hcq (O, P(x, W )) is naturally isomorphic to the minimal globalization of I(x, W ). Us-
ing this result, we are now ready to establish the nonvanishing clause of the geometric
embedding.
Theorem 4.3. Let S be a G0 -orbit on Y and suppose q denotes the vanishing number of
S. Choose a special point y ∈ S and let V be an irreducible polarized representation for
G0 [y]. Let O be the associated orbit in X and choose x ∈ O ∩ Xy . Assume (x, V /nx V )
                                      A GEOMETRIC EMBEDDING                                  17

is a classifying data. Then Hcq (S, P(y, V )) is non-zero. In particular, Hcq (S, P(y, V )) is
naturally isomorphic to a topologically closed, non-zero submodule of Hcq (O, P(x, V /nx V )).
Proof: Let N be the associated manifold in X and put U = N − O. Let
                                                W
                                                ↓
                                                N
associated vector bundle and let PW denote the corresponding sheaf of polarized sections.
Consider the short exact sequence
                        0 → (PW |U )X → (PW )X → (PW |O )X → 0.
The proof is by contradiction. Suppose Hcq (S, P(y, V )) = 0. Since
                            H q (S, P(y, V )) ∼
                                  c
                                                             X
                                              = H q (X, (PW ) )
we thus obtain a continuous G0 -equivariant inclusion
               Hcq (O, P(x, V /nx V )) ∼
                                       = Hcq (O, PW |O ) → Hcq+1 (U, PW |U ).
Put Λ = {G0 − orbits E ⊆ N : E has vanishing number q + 1}. Then, arguing as in the
previous section, we obtain a continuous G0 −equivariant inclusion
                                            M
                         Hcq+1(U, PW |U ) →    Hcq+1 (E, PW |E ).
                                                 E∈Λ

Let J(x, V /nx V ) denote the unique irreducible Harish-Chandra submodule of I(x, V /nx V )
and let J(x, V /nx V ) denote the closure of J(x, V /nx V ) in Hcq (O, P(x, V /nx V )). By com-
posing the two inclusions above, one obtains an E ∈ Λ and a continuous G0 −equivariant
inclusion
                              J(x, V /nx V ) → Hcq+1 (E, PW |E ).
Choose a special point z ∈ E ∩ Xy . Then
                         H q+1 (E, PW |E ) ∼
                           c                = H q+1 (E, P(z, V /nz V ))
                                                  c

so that the underlying Harish-Chandra module of Hcq+1 (E, PW |E ) is the Beilinson-
Bernstein module I(z, V /nz V ). We therefore have an inclusion of Harish-Chandra modules
                                 J(x, V /nx V ) → I(z, V /nz V ).
Let λ ∈ h∗ such that bx and bz act on V /nx V and V /nz V , respectively by the specialization
of λ + ρ. Put Θ = W · λ and consider the localization functor
                               ∆λ : MHC (UΘ , K) → Mcoh (Dλ , K).
By our hypothesis, λ is antidominant. Let I(z, V /nz V ) be the standard Harish-Chandra
sheaf from Mcoh (Dλ , K) such that
                               I(z, V /nz V ) = Γ(X, I(z, V /nz V )).
By the adjointness property, the inclusion of J(x, V /nx V ) in I(z, V /nz V ) defines a non-
zero morphism
                         ϕ : ∆λ (J(x, V /nx V )) → I(z, V /nz V ).
Thus we have the following exact sequence in Mcoh (Dλ , K)
                                                             ϕ
                      0 → ker(ϕ) → ∆λ (J(x, V /nx V )) → im(ϕ) → 0
18                                      TIM BRATTEN

where ker(ϕ) and im(ϕ) denote the kernel and the image of ϕ, respectively. Since the
K−orbit of x has open intersection with the fiber Xy , it follows that x does not belong
to the closure of the K−orbit of z, thus the stalk im(ϕ)x is zero. On the other hand, we
claim that the stalk of the quotient
                                (∆λ (J(x, V /nx V ))/ ker(ϕ))x
is not zero. To establish this claim, observe that since Γ ◦ ∆λ is the identity, it follows
that
                                    Γ(X, ker(ϕ)) = 0.
Let J (x, V /nx V ) denote the unique irreducible object in Mcoh (Dλ , K) such that
                            J(x, V /nx V ) = Γ(X, J (x, V /nx V )).
Therefore, by Lemma 4.2, ker(ϕ) is contained in the kernel of the canonical surjection
                          ∆λ (J(x, V /nx V )) → J (x, V /nx V ) → 0.
Therefore we have a surjection
                      ∆λ (J(x, V /nx V ))/ ker(ϕ) → J (x, V /nx V ) → 0.
This last surjection implies the claim, since J (x, V /nx V )x 6= 0. 

5. Realizing Some Irreducible Subrepresentations of Principal Series in
                      a Complex Reductive Group.
   In this section we let G0 be a connected complex reductive Lie group. In order to
illustrate the embedding of the previous section, we will realize some irreducible subrep-
resentations of the principal series.
   Let C0 ⊆ G0 be a Cartan subgroup with Lie algebra c0 and let c ⊆ g be the correspond-
ing complexification. Fix a Borel subgroup B0 of G0 containing C0 . Let b0 denote the
Lie algebra of B0 and let b ⊆ g indicate the complexification. Thus the G0 −orbit of b in
X is closed. Based on this choice there is a simple 1-1 correspondence between the Weyl
group W0 of c0 in g0 and the set of G0 −orbits in X as follows. Let Σ(c) indicate the set
of roots c in g and let α0 be a root of c0 in g0 . Then the extension of α0 to a complex
linear functional α ∈ c∗ is a root of c in g. Thus we identify the roots Σ0 of c0 in g0 with a
subset of Σ(c). In turn W0 is identified with a subgroup of the Weyl group of c in g. Thus
for w ∈ W0 we can define the Borel subalgebra w · b of g containing c. The application
assigning w ∈ W0 to the G0 −orbit of w ·b defines the desired 1-1 correspondence. Observe
that the dimension of the G0 −orbit grows with the length of w. In particular, the open
G0 −orbit on X corresponds to the longest element of W0 .
   Let
                                          χ : H0 → C
be a continuous character. Then χ extends uniquely to a character of the stabilizer
G0 [w · b] of w · b in X and the derivative dχ of χ extends uniquely to a 1-dimensional
complex representation of w · b. Thus χ determines an irreducible polarized module for
G0 [w · b]. We use the notation
                                         A(w, χ)
                                   A GEOMETRIC EMBEDDING                                     19

to indicate the corresponding standard analytic module. When w is the identity we simply
write A(χ). In this case A(χ) is the principal series representation consisting of the space
of real analytic functions
             f : G0 → C such that f (gb) = χ(b−1 )f (g) for g ∈ G0 and b ∈ B0 .
  Let dχ indicate the natural extension of the differential of χ to an element of c∗ and
identify dχ with an element of h∗ via the specialization to c∗ at w · b. Put
                                           λ = dχ − ρ
the shifted differential in h∗ . In particular, the sheaf used to define A(w, χ) is a sheaf of
Dλ −modules.
  We will need the following result, which follows directly by an application of the analytic
version of the intertwining functor, established in [6, Proposition 9.10] (also consider [10]).
Proposition 5.1. Suppose λ = dχ − ρ. Let α ∈ Σ be a simple route and suppose
                                            ∨
                                            α(λ) ∈
                                                 / Z.
Specializing to c∗ via the point w · b let χα : H0 → C be the corresponding character and
define
                                 γ : H0 → C by χ · χ−1   α .
Then there exists a natural isomorphism
                                   A(w, χ) ∼= A(sα · w, γ)
  Observe that, via the identification made above, the shifted differential
                                         τ = dγ − ρ ∈ h∗
                                            ∨
satisfies the equation τ = sα (λ) = λ − α(λ)α. Hence, when λ is antidominant, then so is
τ . In particular, suppose β is a root. Then
                   ∨               hβ, sα (λ)i      hsα (β), λi        ∨
                   β(sα (λ)) = 2               =2                  = sα (β)(λ).
                                     hβ, βi       hsα (β), sα (β)i
                                                                                  ∨
Thus the claim is established, since sα · Σ+ = (Σ+ − {α}) ∪ {−α} and since α(λ) ∈    / Z.
  We assume that λ is antidominant and that A(w, χ) is a classifying module. Thus
A(w, χ) contains a unique irreducible submodule J(w, χ). In this section we treat the case
where w is the identity and consider the possibility of realizing the irreducible submodule
J(χ) of A(χ).
  Recall we have identified the roots Σ0 of c0 in g0 with subset of Σ(c) ⊆ c∗ . Put
                                      n          ∨
                                                             o
                             Σ0 (χ) = α ∈ Σ0 : α(dχ) ∈ Z .
One knows that Σ0 (χ) is a root subspace of Σ0 . The roots of c in b define positive systems
Σ+         +                +
 0 and Σ0 (χ) = Σ0 (χ) ∩ Σ0 . Σ0 (χ) will be called parabolic (at b) if every simple root in
 +                    +
Σ0 (χ) is simple for Σ0 .
  Suppose Σ0 (χ) is parabolic. Put
                                      Σ0 (u) = Σ+    +
                                                0 − Σ0 (χ)

and define
                                     S + = Σ+
                                            0 (χ) ∪ −Σ0 (u).
20                                      TIM BRATTEN

Thus S + is a positive set of roots for Σ0 . In particular, there exists a unique w ∈ W0 such
that
                                         wΣ+        +
                                              0 = S .
Define                                            X
                                    p =w·b+             g−α
                                                 α∈Σ+
                                                    0 (χ)

where g−α ⊆ g is the corresponding root subspace. Thus p is a parabolic subalgebra of g
with Levi factor
                      X          X                              X
             l=c+          gα +        g−α and nilradical u =         g−α .
                     α∈Σ+
                        0 (χ)     α∈Σ+
                                     0 (χ)
                                                                    α∈Σ0 (u)

Lemma 5.2. Let k be the number of roots in Σ0 (u). Then there is a sequence of roots
                                α1 , . . . , αk with αj ∈ Σ0 (u)
such that αj+1 is simple with respect to the Borel subalgebra
                                         sα1 · · · sαj b
Proof: In the case where Σ0 (u) = Σ+       +
                                   0 and Σ0 (χ) = ∅ a reference for this result can be
found in [6, Lemma 10.6]. The more general case is proved in the same way. 
     Observe that
                                       w = sα1 · · · sαk .
Define
                                    γ = χ · χ−1            −1
                                             α1 · · · · · χαk .
Then the shifted differential associated to γ is antidominant with respect to the point w·b.
Using the positive system Σ+ 0 (χ) with respect to the Levi factor l, let V be the irreducible
l−module with lowest weight dγ. Then V is an irreducible polarized representation for
the normalizer G0 [p] of p in G0 .Let A(p, V ) denote the corresponding standard analytic
module. Then we have the following result.
Theorem 5.3. Assume the principal series representation A(χ) is a classifying module
and let J(χ) ⊆ A(χ) denote the corresponding irreducible subrepresentation. Suppose
Σ0 (χ) is parabolic and define p and V as above. Then there is a natural isomorphism
                                     J(χ) ∼
                                          = A(p, V ).
Proof: Define γ and w as above. Then Proposition 5.1 and Lemma 5.2 determine a
natural isomorphism
                                     A(χ) ∼
                                          = A(w, γ).
Let N ⊆ X be the associated manifold to the G0 −orbit of p. Observe that N is open in
X and that the G0 −orbit of w · b is closed in N. Therefore we have the embedding
                                     A(p, V ) ⊆ A(w, γ)
given by Theorem 4.1. In addition, A(p, V ) 6= {0} by Theorem 4.3. Since the shifted
differential for γ is antidominant, and since the G0 −orbit of p is open, it now follows from
the work in [5] that A(p, V ) is irreducible 
                                     A GEOMETRIC EMBEDDING                                             21

                                            References
 [1] Beilinson, A. and Bernstein, J.: Localisation de g−modules. C.R. Acad. Sci. Paris 292 (1981) 15-18.
 [2] Bell, S. and Narasimhan, R.: Proper holomorphic mappings of complex spaces. In the book Complex
     Manifolds. Springer, 1997.
 [3] Bott, R.: Homogeneous vector bundles. Ann. of Math. 66 (1957) 203-248.
 [4] Bratten, T.: Realizing representations on generalized flag manifolds. Compositio Math. 106 (1997)
     283-319.
 [5] Bratten, T.: Finite rank homogeneous holomorphic vector bundles in flag spaces. Geometry and
     Representation Theory of Real and p−adic Groups. Eds. Tirao, J., Vogan, D. and Wolf, J.; Progress
     in Math. 158, 21-34, Birkhäuser, 1997.
 [6] Hecht, H. and Taylor, J.: Analytic localization of group representations. Advances in Math. 79 (1990)
     139-212.
 [7] Hecht, H., Milicic, D. Schmid, W., and Wolf, J.: Localization and standard modules for real semisim-
     ple Lie groups I: the duality theorem. Inventiones Math. 90 (1987), 297-332.
 [8] Kashiwara, M. and Schmid, W.: Quasi-equivariant D−modules, equivariant derived category and
     representations of reductive Lie groups. Brylinski, Jean-Luc (ed.) et al., Lie theory and geometry:
     in honor of Bertram Kostant on the occasion of his 65th birthday. Boston, MA: Birkhäuser. Prog.
     Math. 123, 457-488 (1994).
 [9] Matsuki, T.: Orbits on affine symmetric spaces under the action of parabolic subgroups. Hiroshima
     Math. J. 12 (1982) 307-320.
[10] Milicic, D.: Intertwining functors and irreducibility of standard Harish-Chandra sheaves. Harmonic
     analysis on reductive groups, Proc. Conf., Brunswick/ME (USA) 1989, Prog. Math. 101, 209-222.
[11] Schmid, W.: Boundary value problems for group invariant differential equations. Proc. Cartan Sym-
     posium, Astérisque (1985) 311-322.
[12] Schmid, W.: Homogeneous complex manifolds and representations of semisimple Lie groups. Repre-
     sentation theory and harmonic analysis on semisimple Lie groups, Math. Surv. Monogr. 31, 223-286
[13] Wolf, J.A.: The action of a real semi-simple group on a complex flag manifold, I: orbit structure and
     holomorphic arc srtucture. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., 75 (1969), 1121-1237

  Facultad de Ciencias Exactas, UNICEN, Paraje Arroyo Seco, Tandil, Argentina
  E-mail address: bratten@exa.unicen.edu.ar
