                                                 A WEIGHT MULTIPLICITY FORMULA FOR DEMAZURE
                                                                   MODULES
arXiv:math/0409218v1 [math.RT] 14 Sep 2004




                                                                                   BOGDAN ION


                                                     Abstract. We establish a formula for the weight multiplicities of Demazure
                                                     modules (in particular for highest weight representations) of a complex con-
                                                     nected algebraic group in terms of the geometry of its Langlands dual.




                                                                                  Introduction

                                                 Let G be a complex, connected, simple algebraic group and let B and T be a
                                             Borel subgroup and maximal torus of G contained in B. For an integral dominant
                                             weight λ, denote by Vλ the integrable highest weight G-module with highest weight
                                             λ. The Demazure modules Dw(λ) (with w running over the Weyl group of G) form a
                                             filtration of Vλ . The module Dw(λ) is defined as the B–submodule of Vλ generated
                                             by the extremal weight space of weight w(λ) (which are one–dimensional). In
                                             particular, if w◦ is the longest element in the Weyl group of G, Dw◦ (λ) is precisely
                                             Vλ . More importantly, the Demazure modules can be realized as spaces of global
                                             sections of certain line bundles over Schubert varieties (see Section 2 for details).
                                                The main goal of this note is to explain how the recent developments [5], [6] in the
                                             theory of nonsymmetric Macdonald polynomials have as consequence a geometric
                                             formula for weight multiplicities in Demazure modules and, in particular, irreducible
                                             G–modules. We will briefly state our result.
                                                Let G∨ be the unique complex, connected, reductive group whose root datum is
                                             dual to that of G. Let us also consider B ∨ , a Borel subgroup of G∨ . The group G∨
                                             is also defined over O := C[[x]]. We denote G∨ (O) by K and let I be the subgroup
                                             of K defined as the inverse image of B ∨ (C) under the reduction map K → G∨ (C).
                                             The space G∨ (C((x)))/I is endowed with a structure of ind–variety over C. For
                                             any integral weights λ and µ let Mλ,µ (C) be the finite dimensional subvariety of
                                             G∨ (C((x)))/I defined in Section 4.1.

                                             Theorem 1. Let λ and µ be two integral weights such that µ ≤ λ. The weight
                                             multiplicity mλ,µ of the weight λ in the Demazure module Dλ equals the number of
                                             top dimensional irreducible components of Mλ,µ (C).

                                               Supported in part by a Rackham Faculty Research Fellowship.
2                                      BOGDAN ION


   Other geometric formulas for weight multiplicities in irreducible G–modules exist
in the literature [8], [9] but no such formula was available for Demazure modules.
Our result is similar to one consequence [9, Corollary 7.4] of the recent work of
Mirković and Vilonen on the geometric Satake isomorphism (see 4.3 on further
comments about this connection). However, we should keep in mind that the
Demazure modules are generally just B–modules and their result covers only the
case of reductive groups; it would be interesting to investigate if the ideas in [9]
could be used to cover a larger class of groups.
Acknowledgement: I would like to thank Brian Conrad for a clarifying conversation.


                                   1. Preliminaries

1.1. Let g be the complex, simple Lie algebra of rank n and let h and b be a Cartan
subalgebra and, respectively, a Borel subalgebra containing h. Let R̊ be root system
of g with respect to h and denote by R+ the set of roots of b with respect to h.
The set of positive simple roots is denoted by {α1 , . . . , αn } and {λ1 , · · · , λn } will
denote the fundamental weights. As usual, Q̊ denotes the root lattice of R̊ and P
denotes its weight lattice.
   The vector space h∗R (the real vector space spanned by the roots) has a canonical
scalar product (·, ·) which we normalize such that it gives square length 2 to the
short roots in R̊ (if there is only one root length we consider all roots to be short).
We will use R̊s and R̊ℓ to refer to the short and respectively long roots in R̊. We
will identify the vector space hR (the real vector space spanned by the coroots) with
its dual using this scalar product. Under this identification α∨ = 2α/(α, α) for any
root α. The root θ is defined as the highest short root in R̊. Also, let us consider
                                          1X ∨
                                     ρ=         α
                                          2
                                              α∈R


   To the finite root system R̊ we will associate an affine root system R. Let Aff(hR )
be the space of affine linear transformations of hR . As a vector space, it can be
identified to h∗R ⊕ Rδ via

               (f + cδ)(x) = f (x) + c,     for f ∈ h∗R , x ∈ hR and c ∈ R

Let r denote the maximal number of laces connecting two vertices in the Dynkin
diagram of R̊. Then,

                       R := (R̊s + Zδ) ∪ (R̊ℓ + rZδ) ⊂ h∗R ⊕ Rδ

   The set of affine positive roots R+ consists of affine roots of the form α + kδ
such that k is non–negative if α is a positive root, and k is strictly positive if α is
a negative root. The affine simple roots are {αi }0≤i≤n , where we set α0 := δ − θ.
                                                                                         3


1.2. The scalar product on h∗R can be extended to a non–degenerate bilinear form
on the real vector space
                                 H := h∗R ⊕ Rδ ⊕ RΛ0
by requiring that (δ, h∗R ⊕ Rδ) = (Λ0 , h∗R ⊕ RΛ0 ) = 0 and (δ, Λ0 ) = 1. Given α ∈ R
and x ∈ H let
                                                    2(x, α)
                                      sα (x) := x −         α
                                                    (α, α)
The affine Weyl group W is the subgroup of GL(H) generated by all sα (the simple
reflections si = sαi are enough). The finite Weyl group W̊ is the subgroup generated
by s1 , . . . , sn . It is easy to see that h∗R + Rδ + Λ0 is stable under the action of W .
Therefore, if we identify h∗R with h∗R + Rδ + Λ0 we obtain an affine action of W on
h∗R ; we denote by w · x the affine action of w ∈ W on x ∈ h∗R . For example, the
affine action of s0 can be described as follows

                                   s0 · x = sθ (x) + θ                                 (1)

   We define the fundamental affine chamber as

                  C := {x ∈ h∗R | (x + Λ0 , α∨
                                             i ) ≥ 0 , 0 ≤ i ≤ n}             (2)
                                     T
The non-zero elements of OP := P C are the so-called minuscule weights. Let
us remark that each orbit of the affine action of W on P contains the origin or a
unique element of OP .

1.3. For each w in W let ℓ(w) be the length of a reduced (i.e. shortest) decompo-
sition of w in terms of simple reflections. The length of w can be also geometrically
described as follows. For any affine root α, denote by Hα the affine hyperplane con-
sisting of fixed points of the affine action of sα on h∗R . Then, ℓ(w) equals the number
of affine hyperplanes Hα separating C and w · C. For any affine transformation of h∗R
which preserves the set of hyperplanes {Hα }α∈R , we can use the geometric point
of view to define the length of that transformation. For example, for a weight λ we
define the following affine transformation of h∗R

                                     τλ (x) = x + λ

It is easy to check that τλ has the required properties to allow us to talk about its
length. In fact a concrete formula for its length is available (see, for example, [5,
(5)])
                                         X
                                ℓ(τλ ) =    |(λ, α∨ )|                           (3)
                                           α∈R̊

   For each weight λ define λ− , respectively λ̃, to be the unique element in W̊ (λ),
respectively W · λ, which is an anti-dominant weight, respectively an element of OP
                                                                      −1
(that is a minuscule weight or zero), and ẘ−1
                                             λ ∈ W̊ , respectively wλ ∈ W , to be
the unique minimal length element by which this is achieved. Also, for each weight
4                                   BOGDAN ION


λ define λ+ to be the unique element in W̊ (λ) which is dominant and denote by
w◦ the maximal length element in W̊ . It was shown in [5, Lemma 1.7 (3)] that the
following equality holds for any weight λ

                              ℓ(τλ ) = ℓ(wλ ) + ℓ(ẘλ )                         (4)

For later use we record the following.

Lemma 1.1. Let λ be a weight. Then

                              2hλ, ρi ≤ ℓ(wλ ) + ℓ(ẘλ )

Proof. From (3) we know that 2hλ, ρi ≤ ℓ(τλ ). Now, (4) implies the desired result.
                                                                                 

1.4. The Bruhat order is a partial order on any Coxeter group defined in way
compatible with the length function. For an element w we put w < si w if and
only if ℓ(w) < ℓ(si w). The transitive closure of this relation is called the Bruhat
order. The terminology is motivated by the way this ordering arises for Weyl groups
in connection with inclusions among closures of Bruhat cells for a corresponding
semisimple algebraic group.
  We can use the Bruhat order on W to define a partial order on the weight lattice
which will also be called the Bruhat order. For any λ, µ ∈ P we write

                          λ < µ if and only if wλ < wµ                          (5)

The minimal elements of the weight lattice with respect to this partial order are
the minuscule weights and if λ < µ then necessarily λ̃ = µ̃.

Lemma 1.2. Let λ and µ be two weights such that µ ≤ λ. Define the rational
number
                             1      1
                    nλ,µ := ℓ(wλ ) − ℓ(ẘλ ) + ℓ(w◦ ) − hµ, ρi         (6)
                             2      2
Then nλ,µ is a positive integer.

Proof. Let us argue first that nλ,µ is positive. We can use Lemma 1.1 to obtain
                     1         1                  1         1
               nλ,µ ≥  ℓ(wλ ) − ℓ(ẘλ ) + ℓ(w◦ ) − ℓ(wµ ) − ℓ(ẘµ )
                     2         2                  2         2
Keeping in mind that ℓ(wλ ) ≥ ℓ(wµ ) (which is a consequence of the hypothesis)
and that w◦ is the maximal length element in W̊ , our claim immediately follows.
    To show that nλ,µ is integer, let us remark that it is enough to check that
1
2 ℓ(wλ )+ 12 ℓ(ẘλ ) is integer. This fact follows from (4) together with

                             ℓ(τλ ) = ℓ(τλ+ ) = 2hλ+ , ρi

                                                                                  
                                                                                    5


                             2. Demazure modules

   Let G be a complex, connected, simple algebraic group with Lie algebra g and
denote by T and B the maximal torus and the Borel subgroup of G with Lie algebras
h and b, respectively.
    For an integral dominant weight λ, denote by Vλ the integrable highest weight g-
module with highest weight λ. It is well known that Vλ is an irreducible g–module.
Hence, for any w in W̊ the w(λ)–weight space Vλ,w(λ) is one–dimensional. The
Demazure module Dw(λ) is defined as the b–module generated by Vλ,w(λ) . Since λ
is integral Dw(λ) is also a B–module. The Demazure modules associated to a fixed
integral dominant weight λ form a filtration (with respect to the Bruhat order on
W̊ ) of Vλ . In particular, Dλ = Vλ,λ and Dw◦ (λ) = Vλ .
   There exists an important geometrical construction of Demazure modules which
relates them with the geometry of Schubert varieties in the flag variety G/B. For
any w in W̊ let
                              Xw = BwB/B ⊆ G/B
denote the Schubert variety associated to w. The Schubert varieties are closed finite
dimensional projective irreducible subvarieties of G/B. For any integral weight λ we
denote by eλ the character of B obtained from T via the isomorphism T ≃ B/[B, B].
Consider the fiber product Lλ = G ×B Cλ , where Cλ denotes C equipped with
the B–action given by the character eλ . The natural projection G × Cλ → G
induces a well defined G–equivariant holomorphic map Lλ → G/B; in other words
Lλ becomes a G–equivariant holomorphic line bundle over G/B. By restriction
we obtain a line bundle Lλ,w over Xw . Since Xw is B–invariant, the space of
holomorphic sections H 0 (Xw , Lλ,w ) admits a B–module structure. The relation
with the Demazure module Dw(λ) is the following.

Theorem 2.1. Let λ be a dominant integral weight and let w be an element of W .
Then, Dw(λ) and H 0 (Xw , L−λ,w )∗ are isomorphic as B–modules.

  The result holds in the more general setting of generalized flag varieties of Kac–
Moody groups. For a proof see, for example, Corollary 8.1.26 in [7].
   Let λ be an arbitrary integral weight. As T ⊂ B, the Demazure module Dλ is
also a T –module. Its T –character will be denoted by χλ . Let us write
                                        X
                               χλ =          mλ,µ eµ                      (7)
                                     µ∈X ∗ (T )

where we denoted by X ∗ (T ) the character group of the torus T . The non–negative
integers mλ,µ appearing in the above formula are the multiplicities of the weights
µ in the Demazure module Dλ . As remarked before, if λ is dominant, χλ equals eλ
and χw◦ (λ) is the character of Vλ .
6                                     BOGDAN ION


                  3. Nonsymmetric Macdonald polynomials

3.1. Let us introduce a field Cq,t (of parameters) as follows. Let q and t be two
formal parameters and let m be the lowest common denominator of the rational
numbers {(αj , λk ) | 1 ≤ j, k ≤ n}. The field Cq,t is defined as the field of rational
                1        1
functions in q m and t 2 with complex coefficients. We will also use the field of
                        1
rational functions in t 2 denoted by Ct . The algebra Rq,t = Cq,t [eλ ; λ ∈ P ] is the
group Cq,t -algebra of the lattice P . Similarly, the algebra Rt = Ct [eλ ; λ ∈ P ] is the
group Ct -algebra of the lattice P .
   The nonsymmetric Macdonald polynomials Eλ (q, t) associated to the root system
R̊ are remarkable family of polynomials indexed by the weight lattice P and which
form a basis for Rq,t . They were defined by Opdam and Macdonald for various
specializations of the parameters and in full generality by Cherednik [1]. We refer
the reader to [1] for a detailed account of their construction and basic properties.
We only mention at this point that they satisfy the following triangularity property
with respect to the Bruhat order

                             Eλ (q, t) ∈ spanh eµ | µ ≤ λ i


3.2. Although, a priori, the coefficients of the polynomials Eλ (q, t) are just rational
functions in q and t it was proved in [5, Section 3.1] that in fact each coefficient has
a finite limit as q approaches infinity and, in consequence,

                                 Eλ (t) = lim Eλ (q, t)
                                          q→∞

is well defined as an element of Rt .
   Another important fact is that the coefficients of Eλ (t) are polynomials in t−1
and in consequence their limit as t approaches infinity is finite. Moreover, the
following is true. Let G, B and T be a complex connected simple algebraic group,
a Borel subgroup and a maximal torus as in Section 2. We can certainly regard
X ∗ (T ), the character group of the torus T , as being a sublattice of P . Therefore,
the Demazure character χλ associated to an integral weight λ becomes an element
of Rt , and the formula (7) will be regarded as an identity in Rt . The following
result was proved in [5, Corollary 3.8].

Theorem 3.1. Let λ be an arbitrary integral weight for G. Then,

                                    χλ = lim Eλ (t)                                   (8)
                                          t→∞


3.3. For special values of the parameter t the coefficients of the polynomials Eλ (t)
have a rather different interpretation. To be able to state the result we first need
to introduce more notation.
                                                                                      7


  Given λ in P let us define the following normalization factor
                                         1
                                 jλ = t 2 (ℓ(wλ )−ℓ(ẘλ ))                          (9)

where wλ and ẘλ are the Weyl group elements defined in Section 1. Let us remark
that, as it follows from [5, Corollary 3.4], the normalization factor denoted by the
same symbol in [6, (12)] is, for equal values of the parameters, precisely the element
defined above.


3.4. Let G∨ be the unique split, connected, reductive group scheme whose root
datum is dual to that of G (the Chevalley group scheme). Let B∨ be a Borel
subgroup of G∨ and T∨ a maximal split torus of G∨ contained in B∨ . The Borel
B∨ has the Levi decomposition B = T∨ U, where U is the unipotent radical of
B∨ . The unique Borel subgroup of G∨ which is opposed to B∨ with respect to T∨
                       ∨
will be denoted by B and U denotes its unipotent radical. We have deliberately
ignored the field of definition since all above groups are defined over Z (the structure
constants involve only integers).
   Let p be a prime number and t a positive integer power of p. We will denote by
Ft the finite field with t elements. For the moment let k denote an arbitrary field.
Let x be a formal parameter and let F := k((x)) be the quotient field of O := k[[x]]
(formal power series with coefficients in k). Of course, F is a p–adic field, O is its
ring of integers and k is the residue field.
    The F –rational points of G∨ will be denoted by G∨ (F ) (or simply by G∨ if the
field F is implicitly understood) and the same type of notation will be used for all
the linear algebraic groups defined above. Each λ ∈ X ∗ (T ) becomes an element
of X∗ (T ∨ ) (the cocharacter group of T ∨ ) and therefore determines a morphism
λ : F × → T ∨ . We will denote by xλ the image of x under the above morphism.
The groups G∨ , T∨ , U, U are also defined over O. We will denote G∨ (O) by K
and denote by I the Iwahori subgroup defined as the inverse image of B ∨ (k) under
G∨ (O) → G∨ (k). Of course, all the above considerations hold if we replace k by Z.


3.5. In this subsection we will assume that the field k is Ft . Let us remark that
the affine root system associated to (G∨ , T ∨) is in fact R∨ and that K is a maximal
compact subgroup of G∨ .
   The group G∨ is unimodular as opposed to the Borel subgroup B ∨ which is not.
We choose a Haar measure on G∨ normalized such that the Iwahori subgroup I has
volume one. The modular function of the Borel subgroup δ : T ∨ → R×   + is defined
                                        ∨
by δ(a) = |det(Ad|U (a))| for any a in T ; we denoted by Ad|U the automorphism
of the Lie algebra of U given by the adjoint representation and we denoted by | · |
the usual metric on F induced by the valuation. Since G∨ is split, the formula for
8                                     BOGDAN ION


the modular function takes the following form on the elements xλ , for λ ∈ X ∗ (T )

                                    δ(xλ ) = t2hλ,ρi                             (10)

   For an element f = f (t) in Rt we will write f (t) to refer to the element of
C[eλ ; λ ∈ P ] obtained by substituting the positive integer t for the parameter t.
We are now ready to state a result connecting the coefficients of nonsymmetric
Macdonald polynomials with the geometry of the group G∨ . The Theorem stated
below was proved in [6] (see Theorem 5.10 and formula (25)).

Theorem 3.2. Let λ be an element of X ∗ (T ) (or, equivalently, of X∗ (T ∨ )). The
coefficients appearing in
                                     X
                            Eλ (t) =     cλ,µ eµ
                                              µ≤λ

are given by
                                    vol(U x−µ I ∩ Kx−λ I)
                           cλ,µ =                   1
                                     jλ (t)tℓ(w◦ ) δ 2 (xw◦ (µ) )

  We would prefer to make the denominator in the above formula as explicit as
possible.

Lemma 3.3. Let λ and µ be two elements of X ∗ (T ) for which µ ≤ λ. Then,
                                          1
                            jλ (t)tℓ(w◦ ) δ 2 (xw◦ (µ) ) = tnλ,µ

Proof. Straightforward from (6), (9) and (10).                                      

   By combining Theorem 3.1 and Theorem 3.2 we can see that the weight mul-
tiplicities (as defined by (7)) of the Demazure module Dλ can be computed as
follows.

Corollary 3.4. Let λ and µ be two elements of X ∗ (T ) for which µ ≤ λ. Then,
                                      vol(U x−µ I ∩ Kx−λ I)
                        mλ,µ = lim                                               (11)
                                  t→∞         tnλ,µ

                         4. The multiplicity formula

4.1. The varieties Mλ,µ . Let us assume for a moment that k = C. It is well–
known (see, for example, [9] and the references therein) that the space G∨ /K is
an ind–variety (i.e. admits an increasing filtration with varieties such all inclusion
maps among them are closed embeddings) defined over C. We refer the reader to
[7, Chapter IV] for a brief introduction to ind–varieties. In our case, the members
of the filtration on G∨ /K can be constructed from a filtration of G∨ obtained by
bounding the number of poles with respect to x of the matrix coefficients for a
faithful representation of G∨ .
                                                                                   9


   The space G∨ /K is usually referred to as the affine Grassmannian of G∨ (C).
However, because G∨ and K are still defined for k = Z, the same geometric con-
structions go through in this case, and G∨ /K acquires a structure of ind–variety
defined over Z (see also the remarks in Section 14 of [9]). In a completely similar
way, keeping in mind that I is defined for k = Z, we endow G∨ /I with a structure
of ind–variety defined over Z.
   Let us consider the map π : G∨ → G∨ /I. The group K acts on G∨ /I by finite
dimensional orbits. Indeed, the orbits are all of the form π(Kxν I), and the number
of poles of the elements in Kxν I is bounded by

                                   max |hν, α∨
                                             i i|
                                  1≤i≤n

Therefore, π(Kxν I) is included in one member of the filtration on G∨ /I and hence
it is finite dimensional. For any λ and µ in X∗ (T ), let us define the variety Mλ,µ
as π(U x−µ I ∩ Kx−λ I). From the above considerations it is clear that the varieties
Mλ,µ are finite dimensional and defined over Z.

4.2. Proof of Theorem 1. We will show that the right hand side of the formula
(11) equals the number of irreducible components of top dimension of Mλ,µ (C). Let
us recall that Corollary 3.4 holds under the hypothesis k = Ft . Because the Iwahori
subgroup I has volume one we can regard the volume of the set U x−µ I ∩ Kx−λ I
as the number of right I–cosets in U x−µ I ∩ Kx−λ I or, equivalently, as the number
of points in Mλ,µ (Ft ) (which we denote by |Mλ,µ (Ft )|).
  The Lefschetz fixed point formula (for the Frobenius automorphism) and Theo-
rem 1 in [2] (for F0 = Qℓ , S0 = Spec(Ft ) and X0 = Mλ,µ ) let us conclude that
                                        |Mλ,µ (Ft )|
                                  lim
                                  t→∞     tnλ,µ
is indeed the number of irreducible components of top dimension of Mλ,µ (C).
  As an immediate consequence we obtain the following.

Corollary 4.1. Let λ and µ be two elements of X ∗ (T ) for which µ ≤ λ. The
dimension of Mλ,µ (C) is nλ,µ .

4.3. Final remarks. If we keep in mind that for anti–dominant λ the Demazure
module Dλ is in fact Vλ+ , the irreducible G–module with highest weight λ+ =
w◦ (λ) (or lowest weight λ), our result gives a geometric formula for the weight
multiplicities of Vλ+ . However, if we would be only interested in a formula for
weight multiplicities in Vλ (here λ is dominant), this could be obtained by closely
following the argument given above but replacing in Theorem 3.1 the nonsymmetric
Macdonald polynomials with symmetric Macdonald polynomials Pλ (t) (at q → ∞)
and Theorem 3.2 with corresponding result stating the fact that Pλ (t) arises as the
10                                         BOGDAN ION


Satake transform of the characteristic function of the set Kxλ K. If we denote by
Zλ,µ (C) the C–points of the image of U xµ K ∩ Kxλ K through the map

                                         π̃ : G∨ → G∨ /K

the corresponding result read as follows.

Theorem 4.2. Let λ and µ be two dominant integral weights such that µ ≤ λ. The
weight multiplicity mλ,µ of the weight µ in the irreducible highest weight module Vλ
equals the number of top dimensional irreducible components of Zλ,µ (C).

   The above statement is quite close to one of results in [9] which we will briefly
recall. For the following statements we assume that k = C. First, Theorem 3.2 in
[9] shows that π̃(U xµ K) ∩ π̃(Kxλ K) (the closure is in G∨ /K) is pure dimensional
(which, of course, implies that Zλ,µ is pure dimensional). Second, as a consequence
of the equivalence of tensor categories between the category of representations of
G and the category of K–equivariant perverse sheaves on the affine Grassmannian
G∨ /K with C–coefficients, Corollary 7.4 in [9] states that the weight multiplicity
mλ,µ equals the number of irreducible components of π̃(U xµ K) ∩ π̃(Kxλ K). The
absence of the closure in Theorem 4.2 slightly improves this statement.
   The main result in [9] (the above mentioned equivalence of categories) was proved
for reductive groups. Keeping in mind that Theorem 1 holds for Demazure modules
(which are just B–modules) and that B is a solvable group, our result seems to
suggest that the results of Mirković and Vilonen might eventually be extended to
a larger class of groups and representations.


                                           References
 [1] I. Cherednik, Nonsymmetric Macdonald polynomials. Internat. Math. Res. Notices 1995,
     no.10, 483–515.
 [2] P. Deligne, La conjecture de Weil. II. Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math. 52 (1980),
     137–252.
 [3] M. Demazure, Désingularisation des variétés de Schubert généralisées, Ann. Sci. École Norm.
     Sup. (4) 7 (1974), 53–88.
 [4] B. Ion, Nonsymmetric Macdonald polynomials and Demazure characters. Duke Math. J. 116
     (2003), no. 2, 299–318.
 [5] B. Ion, A Kato–Lusztig formula for nonsymmetric Macdonald polynomials. Preprint,
     math.QA/0406060.
 [6] B. Ion, Nonsymmetric Macdonald polynomials and matrix coefficients for unramified princi-
     pal series. Preprint, math.QA/0407044.
 [7] S. Kumar, Kac-Moody groups, their flag varieties and representation theory. Progress in
     Mathematics 204. Birkhäuser Boston, Inc., Boston, MA, 2002.
 [8] G. Lusztig, Singularities, character formulas, and a q–analog of weight multiplicities. Anal-
     ysis and topology on singular spaces, II, III (Luminy, 1981), Astérisque 101–102, 208–229,
     Soc. Math. France, Paris, 1983.
                                                                                          11


[9] I. Mirković and K. Vilonen, Geometric Langlands duality and representations of algebraic
   groups over commutative rings. Preprint, math.RT/0401222.


  Department of Mathematics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109

  E-mail address: bogdion@umich.edu
