                                            APPEARED IN BULLETIN OF THE
                                            AMERICAN MATHEMATICAL SOCIETY
                                            Volume 28, Number 2, April 1993, Pages 215-252


                                            AN EXTERNAL APPROACH TO UNITARY REPRESENTATIONS
arXiv:math/9304215v1 [math.RT] 1 Apr 1993




                                                                                      Marko Tadić


                                                                                      Introduction
                                                The principal ideas of harmonic analysis on a locally compact group G which
                                            is not necessarily compact or commutative were developed in the 1940s and early
                                            1950s. In this theory, the role of the classical fundamental harmonics is played
                                            by the irreducible unitary representations of G. The set of all equivalence classes
                                            of such representations is denoted by G  b and is called the dual object of G or the
                                            unitary dual of G.
                                                Since the 1940s, an intensive study of the foundations of harmonic analysis on
                                            complex and real reductive groups has been in progress (for a definition of reductive
                                            groups, the reader may consult the appendix at the end of §2). The motivation for
                                            this development came from mathematical physics, differential equations, differen-
                                            tial geometry, number theory, etc. Through the 1960s, progress in the direction of
                                            the Plancherel formula for real reductive groups was great, due mainly to Harish-
                                            Chandra’s monumental work, while at the same time, the unitary duals of only a
                                            few groups had been parametrized.
                                                With Mautner’s work [Ma], a study of harmonic analysis on reductive groups
                                            over other locally compact nondiscrete fields was started. We shall first describe
                                            such fields. In the sequel, a locally compact nondiscrete field will be called a local
                                            field.
                                                If we have a nondiscrete absolute value on the field Q of rational numbers, then
                                            it is equivalent either to the standard absolute value (and the completion is the
                                            field R of real numbers) or to a p-adic absolute value for some prime number p.
                                            For r ∈ Q× write r = pα a/b where α, a, and b are integers and neither a nor b are
                                            divisible by p. Then the p-adic absolute value of r is

                                                                                         |r|p = p−α .

                                            A completion of Q with respect to the p-adic absolute value is denoted by Qp . It is
                                            called a field of p-adic numbers. Each finite-dimensional extension F of Qp has a
                                            natural topology of a vector space over Qp . With this topology, F becomes a local
                                            field. The topology of F can also be introduced with an absolute value which is
                                            denoted by | |F (in §5 we shall fix a natural absolute value). The fields of real and
                                            complex numbers, together with the finite extensions of p-adic numbers, exhaust
                                            all local fields of characteristic zero up to isomorphisms [We].
                                                Let F be a finite field. Denote by F((X)) the fieldP∞of formal power series over
                                            F. Elements of this field are series of the form f = n=k an X n , an ∈ F, for some
                                                                                                        c
                                                                                                        1993 American Mathematical Society
                                                                                                          0273-0979/93 $1.00 + $.25 per page

                                                                                              1
2                                    MARKO TADIĆ


integer k. Fix q > 1. Very often q is taken to be the cardinal number of the finite
field F. One defines an absolute value of f by the formula

                               |f |F((X)) = q −min{n;an 6=0}

when f 6= 0. In this way F((X)) becomes a local field. Fields of formal power series
over finite fields exhaust all local fields of positive characteristic up to isomorphisms
[We].
   The fields R and C are called archimedean fields. For any x, y ∈ R× or x, y ∈ C× ,
there is always a positive integer n such that |y| < |nx|. The above property does
not hold for any other local field. This is the reason that local fields which are not
isomorphic to R or C are called nonarchimedean local fields.
   After Mautner in the 1960s, a series of people started to consider reductive groups
over nonarchimedean local fields. Let us recall that p-adic fields were introduced
historically to enable one to consider a single equation over a p-adic field instead
of an infinite series of congruences mod pk . Arithmetical problems also provided
motivation to consider representations of reductive groups over such fields. The
strongest motivation comes from the Langlands program. A unifying element in
this program is the representation theory of reductive groups. A nice introduction
to the Langlands program is [Gb3].
   Let G be a reductive group over a local field. Harish-Chandra created a strat-
egy for obtaining the unitary dual G     b through the nonunitary dual G,   e where G  e is
the set of all functional equivalence classes of topologically completely irreducible
continuous representations of G. Functional equivalence means that the matrix
coefficients of one representation may be approximated by matrix coefficients of
another on compact sets, and vice versa. A complete definition of G         e is in §2. To
         b                            e
obtain G, one needs to classify G (the problem of the nonunitary dual) and to
identify Gb ⊆ G  e (the unitarizability problem). In [L2] Langlands showed how to
parametrize G   e by irreducible representations with certain good asymptotic prop-
erties (tempered representations) of reductive subgroups, when the field F is R.
The tempered representations were classified for F = R by Knapp and Zuckerman
[KnZu] on the basis of Harish-Chandra’s work, thus providing a complete picture
   e Despite the Langlands classification of G
of G.                                              e in the archimedean case, there were
no big breakthroughs in the classification of unitary duals for quite a long time.
Borel-Wallach and Silberger proved that Langlands parametrization of G          e in terms
of tempered representations of reductive subgroups was valid for reductive groups
over all local fields [BlWh, Si1].
   In this paper, we shall be concerned with the unitarizability problem for reductive
groups over local fields. One usually breaks the unitarizability problem into two
parts. The first part is constructing elements of G,       b and the second is showing
                                                      b
that the constructed representations exhaust G (completeness argument). The
completeness argument is usually realized by showing that the classes of G\        e G
                                                                                     b are
not unitarizable. We may call such an approach to the completeness argument
indirect.
   Suppose that the field is archimedean. Then one can linearize the problems for G      b
       e one can “differentiate” the representations and come to the infinitesimal
(and G);
theory where the main object is the Lie algebra g of G. Also, for a maximal compact
subgroup K of G, the theory of compact Lie groups gives an explicit description
              AN EXTERNAL APPROACH TO UNITARY REPRESENTATIONS                            3

    b Thus, one may try to understand (π, H) ∈ G
of K.                                                   e by studying the restriction of
π to K. These two points explain why, in the archimedean case, some problems
concerning representations, and especially the unitarizability problem, were often
approached by studying the internal structure of representations. Let us recall that
the internal approach was very successful in the compact Lie group case (restriction
to a maximal torus). In the nonarchimedean case, there is no possibility of such an
internal approach to the unitarizability problem. One of the reasons that there has
been much less study of the unitarizability problem is that the nonunitary duals
are not yet completely parametrized there.
   Despite the fact that unitary duals of a very restricted number of groups have
been classified, it is interesting to note that in 1950 Gelfand and Naimark published
a book [GfN2] in which they constructed what they assumed to be the dual ob-
jects of the complex classical simple Lie groups. Their lists were very simple, and
the representations were also simple (although infinite dimensional). Gelfand and
Naimark were using functional analytic methods as tools in their analysis. In 1967
Stein constructed, in a fairly simple manner, representations in GL(2n, C)ˆ which
were not contained in the lists of Gelfand and Naimark [St]. For some other classical
groups, it was even easier to see the incompleteness of the lists from [GfN2].
   The representations of Gelfand and Naimark of GL(n, C), complemented by
Stein, were not generally expected to exhaust the whole of GL(n, C)ˆ.
   The main aim of this paper is to present the ideas which lead first to the solution
of the unitarizability problem for GL(n) over nonarchimedean local fields [Td3] and
to the recognition that the same result holds over archimedean local fields [Td2],
a result which was proved by Vogan [Vo3] using an internal approach. Let us say
that the approach that we are going to present may be characterized as external.
At no point do we go into the internal structure of representations.
   Let us present the answer. We fix a general local field F . Let Du be the set
of all functional equivalence classes of irreducible square integrable modulo center
representations of all GL(n, F ), n ≥ 1 (for definition see §3). Let | |F be the
modulus of F (see §5). For each representation δ ∈ Du of GL(n, F ), and for each
m ≥ 1, consider the representation of GL(mn, F ) parabolically induced (§1) by
                     (m−1)/2             (m−3)/2                     −(m−1)/2
               | det |F        δ ⊗ | det |F        δ ⊗ · · · ⊗ | det |F         δ

from a suitable standard parabolic subgroup (i.e., from one containing the upper tri-
angular matrices, §2). This representation has a unique irreducible quotient which
will be denoted by u(δ, m). For 0 < α < 1/2 let π(u(δ, m), α) be the representation
of GL(2mn, F ) parabolically induced by
                                                     −α
                           | det |α
                                  F u(δ, m) ⊗ | det |F u(δ, m).

Denote by B all possible u(δ, m) and π(u(δ, m), α). Then the answer is
Theorem. (i) Let τ1 , . . . , τn ∈ B. Then the representation π parabolically induced
by
                                     τ1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ τn
of suitable GL(m, F ) is irreducible and unitary.
   (ii) Suppose that ρ is obtained from σ1 , . . . , σn ∈ B in the same manner as π
was obtained from τ1 , . . . , τm in (i). Then π ∼         = ρ if and only if n = m and the
sequences (τ1 , . . . , τn ) and (σ1 , . . . , σn ) coincide after a renumeration.
4                                  MARKO TADIĆ


   (iii) Each irreducible unitary representation of GL(m, F ), for any m, can be
obtained as in (i).

    A new, and at the same time very old, point of view that led to the papers [Td1–
Td3] was that the unitarizability problem has a reasonably simple answer and that
the unitary representations appear in simple and natural ways. In the completeness
argument, instead of an indirect strategy, a direct argument was used. In this
way, a detailed study of nonunitary representations was avoided. In all arguments,
essentially only Hilbert space representations were necessary.
    Surprisingly, the statement of the theorem, which was first discovered in the
nonarchimedean case in [Td3], says that in the case F = C the unitary dual of
GL(n, C) should consist of the representations of Gelfand, Naimark, and Stein.
Not only the statement of the nonarchimedean case of the theorem, but also the
methods of the proof in [Td3] made sense in the archimedean case. Thus, after a
complete proof had been written in the nonarchimedean case, we wrote in [Td2]
the proof of the archimedean case of the theorem. We have used there a theorem
of Kirillov from [Ki1], for which he never published the complete proof (see §9).
    There are now many solutions of the unitarizability problems, especially for
particular reductive groups in the archimedean case. In general, they are based on
ideas different than the one that we present in this paper. Two of them take a
distinguished place (they solve completely the problem for a series of groups having
no bounds on their semisimple split ranks). The first is Vogan classification in [Vo3]
of the unitary duals of GL(n) over R, C, and H. He proved a theorem equivalent
to the statement of our theorem for archimedean F . The other one is Barbasch’s
classification of the unitary duals of the complex classical Lie groups in [Bb].
    Since we consider both the archimedean and nonarchimedean cases, it is natural
to recall Harish-Chandra’s Lefschetz principle: “Whatever is true for real reduc-
tive groups is also true for p-adic groups” [Ha2]. One problem with the Lefschetz
principle is that we usually obtain a result for archimedean F by one kind of con-
siderations and for nonarchimedean F by very different methods, and after that
we compare the results. An interesting problem is to explain the phenomenon of
the Lefschetz principle, which is certainly related to our depth of understanding of
these two theories. An important task of this paper is to present a unified point
of view on the theorem and its proof. We shall discuss both the theorem and the
proof, making no distinction concerning the nature of the field. This is possible by
the use of the external point of view. In our approach we shall very often be close
to the point of view of the representation theory of general locally compact groups,
and this will be a unifying point.
    Professor P. J. Sally suggested that I write a paper where the ideas would be
extracted from the technical machinery as much as possible. I am thankful to
him for his advice and encouragement and for his generous help during the writing
of various drafts of this paper, which he has read. I am also thankful for the
hospitality and support of the University of Chicago during the summer of 1986
when a sketch of this paper was prepared. I would like to express my thanks to
a number of mathematicians for helpful discussions or encouragement during the
writing of this paper and the preceding ones on the same topic. Let me mention
just a few of them: M. Duflo, I. M. Gelfand, H. Kraljević, D. Miličić, F. Rodier,
P. J. Sally, and M. F. Vigneras. H. Kraljević gave very helpful comments on the
first draft of this paper. Discussions with D. Miličić and his suggestions were of
              AN EXTERNAL APPROACH TO UNITARY REPRESENTATIONS                            5

great help in the preparation of the paper. The referee gave a number of valuable
and helpful suggestions to the preceding draft of this paper. Among others, the
work of J. Bernstein and A. V. Zelevinsky greatly influenced the development of
some ideas presented in this paper. The final step in preparation for publishing
this paper was done in Göttingen. I am thankful for hospitality and support to the
Sonderforschungsbereich 170 and S. J. Patterson.
    We hope that this paper will illustrate a certain internal symmetry in the external
approach to the unitarizability problem. We hope that some of our ideas will be
helpful in dealing with the unitary duals of other nonarchimedean classical groups
(and also nonunitary duals). The papers [SlTd] and [Td8] indicate that this hope
is not without basis.
    Finally, we introduce some general notation which we shall use throughout the
paper. For a topological space X, C(X) will denote the space of all continuous
(complex-valued) functions on X. The subspace of all compactly supported con-
tinuous functions will be denoted by Cc (X). If we have a measure µ on X, then
L1 (X, µ) will denote the space of all classes of µ-integrable functions on X and
L2 (X, µ) will denote the Hilbert space of all classes of square integrable functions
on X with respect to µ. For a smooth manifold X the space of smooth functions
on X will be denoted by C ∞ (X) and C ∞ (X) ∩ Cc (X) will be denoted by Cc∞ (X).
If X is a totally disconnected locally compact topological space, then Cc∞ (X) will
denote the space of all compactly supported locally constant functions on X. The
fields of real and complex numbers are denoted by R and C respectively. The ring
of integers is denoted by Z, nonnegative integers are denoted by Z+ , and positive
ones are denoted by N.

                       1. Concept of harmonic analysis
                      on general locally compact groups
   In this section we shall outline some of the ideas of harmonic analysis on locally
compact groups.
   Let G be a locally compact group. We shall always suppose in this paper that
the groups are separable. A representation of G is a pair (π, V ) where V is a com-
plex vector space which is not zero dimensional and π is a homomorphism of G
into the group of all linear isomorphisms of V . By a continuous representation of
G we shall mean a representation (π, H) of G where H is a Hilbert space and the
map (g, v) 7→ π(g)v, G × H → H is continuous (we shall always assume that H is
separable). A closed subspace H ′ of H will be called a subrepresentation of a con-
tinuous representation (π, H) of G, if H ′ is invariant for all operators π(g), g ∈ G.
A continuous representation (π, H) of G is called irreducible if there does not exist a
nontrivial subrepresentation of (π, H) (i.e., different from {0} and H). A continuous
representation (π, H) of G will be called a unitary representation if all the operators
π(g), g ∈ G, are unitary. Two unitary representations (πi , Hi ), i = 1, 2, of G are
called unitarily equivalent if there exists a Hilbert space isomorphism ϕ : H1 → H2
such that π2 (g)ϕ = ϕπ1 (g) for all g ∈ G. The set of all unitarily equivalence classes
of irreducible unitary representations of G will be denoted by G       b and called the
unitary dual of G. For a family (πi , Hi ), i ∈ I, of unitary representations of G,
there
L is a natural unitary representation of G on the     L directLsum of Hilbert spaces
   i∈I H i . This representation will be denoted  by (    i∈I πi , i∈I Hi ). It is called a
direct sum of representations (πi , Hi ), i ∈ I.
6                                    MARKO TADIĆ


   A continuous representation (resp. unitary representation) on a one-dimensional
space is called a character (resp. unitary character ) of G.
   The main problem of harmonic analysis on the group G is to understand some
interesting unitary representations of G (such representations are usually given on
function spaces). One way to study this problem is to break it into two parts (at
least for type I groups which will be described in the sequel of this section and which
will be the only groups considered in this paper). The first part is to understand
irreducible unitary representations, i.e., G,b and the second part is to understand
other unitary representations in terms of irreducible ones. This strategy is in the
spirit of Fourier’s classical idea of fundamental harmonics.
   Let us explain what we mean by understanding general unitary representations
in terms of irreducible ones. If G is a compact group, then a fundamental fact
is that each unitary representation of G can be decomposed into a direct sum of
irreducible unitary representations [Di, Theorem 15.1.3.]. Understanding a unitary
representation π in terms of irreducible unitary representations means, in the com-
pact case, to know how to decompose π into a direct sum of irreducible unitary
representations. In the noncompact case each unitary representation decomposes
into a direct integral of irreducible unitary representations, and understanding here
again means to know how to decompose a given unitary representation into a direct
integral of irreducible representations. We are not going to define here the notion
of direct integral of representations because the definition is quite technical. The
interested reader may consult [Di, §8]. Let me only mention that the direct integral
generalizes the notion of direct sum and that direct integrals are determined by
measures on G. b To consider measures on G,    b one needs some σ-ring of sets. This
σ-ring arises in a standard way from the natural topological structure on G.     b Now
we shall define this topology.
   If (π, H) is a continuous representation of G and v, w ∈ H, then the function
g 7→ (π(g)v, w) on G is called a matrix coefficient of (π, H). We denote by Φ(π)
the linear span of all matrix coefficients of (π, H). The closure operator on subsets
of Gb is defined as follows. Let π ∈ G  b and X ⊆ G.b Then π ∈ Cl(X) if and only if
each element of Φ(π) can be approximated uniformly on each compact subset of G
                    S                               b will be called the topology of the
by elements from σ∈X Φ(σ). This topology on G
unitary dual of G.
   If G is a commutative group, then each irreducible unitary representation of G
is given on a one-dimensional space (this follows easily from the spectral theorem).
Thus each π ∈ G   b is a function. Pointwise multiplication of element of G     b defines
                         b                                         b
a group structure on G. Together with the above topology, G is again a locally
compact commutative group which is called the dual group of G. The role of the
topology of the unitary dual is crucial in harmonic analysis on locally compact
commutative groups. This topology is a basis on which one builds the fundamental
facts of the harmonic analysis on commutative groups. One of these fundamental
facts is that G and (Gˆ)ˆ are canonically isomorphic (Pontryagin duality).
   In the case of noncommutative groups, the role of this topology on G  b is less crucial
than in the commutative case, but it is still an important and natural object to
consider. For example, G is a type I group if and only if G    b is a T0 -space, i.e., for
any two different points in G, b at least one of them has a neighborhood which does
not contain the other one [Di, 9.5.2. and Theorem 9.1]. It is important to notice
that, in general, G b is not topologically homogeneous and there exist significant
             AN EXTERNAL APPROACH TO UNITARY REPRESENTATIONS                        7

connections between properties of irreducible representations and their position in
b with respect to the topology.
G
   Before we proceed further, we shall say a few words about some measures which
are natural to consider on locally compact groups. For a locally compact group G,
there exists a positive measure invariant for right translations. Such a measure will
be called a right Haar measure on G and it will be denoted by µG . Thus,
                         Z                    Z
                           f (gx) dµG (g) =      f (g) dµG (g)
                         G                     G

for any f ∈ Cc (G) and x ∈ G. Any two right Haar measures are proportional. The
behavior of a right Haar measure for left translations is described by the modular
function. There exists a function ∆G on G such that
                   Z                             Z
                     f (xg) dµG (g) = ∆G (x)−1      f (g) dµG (g)
                    G                               G

for any f ∈ Cc (G) and x ∈ G. The group G is called unimodular if ∆G ≡ 1,
i.e., if µG is also invariant for left translations. For more information about Haar
measures and for proofs of the above facts one may consult [Bu2].
    Suppose that G is unimodular. The space Cc (G) becomes an algebra for the
convolution which is defined by the formula
                                        Z
                        (f1 ∗ f2 )(x) =    f1 (xg −1 )f2 (g) dµG (g),
                                      G

f1 , f2 ∈ Cc (G). In a natural way one can extend the convolution to L1 (G, µG ).
Then L1 (G, µG ) becomes a Banach algebra. For f ∈ Cc (G) and a continuous
representation π of G set
                                   Z
                           π(f ) =    f (g)π(g) dµG (g).
                                      G

Now π becomes a representation of the convolution algebra Cc (G), and this repre-
sentation is called the integrated form of the representation π of G. If π is unitary,
then the last formula also defines a representation of the algebra L1 (G, µG ). More-
over, it is a ∗-representation if we define f ∗ (g) = f (g −1 ).
   We have already mentioned that the basic problem of harmonic analysis on
G is to classify G b and then to decompose interesting representations in terms of
 b Among the interesting representations, there is one that should be the first
G.
to be understood, namely, the regular representation on L2 (G, µG ). By the ab-
stract Plancherel theorem, for a unimodular group G there exists a unique positive
measure ν on G   b such that
                   Z                      Z
                             2
                      |f (g)| dµG (g) =      Trace(π(f )π(f )∗ ) dν(π)
                   G                      b
                                          G

for all f ∈ L1 (G, µG ) ∩ L2 (G, µG ) [Di, Theorem 18.8.2]. The measure ν is called
the Plancherel measure of G (it determines an explicit decomposition of L2 (G, µG )
                                       b
into a direct integral of elements of G).
8                                   MARKO TADIĆ


   While the basic ideas of harmonic analysis on general locally compact groups
were laid down in the 1940s, one of the first breakthroughs in classifying unitary
duals was the work of Kirillov for nilpotent Lie groups at the beginning of the 1960s
(see [Ki2, §§13 and 15]).
   Let us first recall that a Lie group is a group supplied with a structure of a (real)
analytic manifold such that the group operations (i.e., multiplication and inversion)
are analytic mappings. We can define the Lie algebra g of a Lie group G as the
tangent space of G at the identity, supplied with a bracket operation [ , ] which can
be defined in the following way. If X, Y ∈ g are tangent vectors to curves x(t), y(t)
for t = 0 respectively, then [X, Y ] is the tangent vector to the curve

                             t 7→ x(τ )y(τ )x(τ )−1 y(τ )−1

where τ = sgn (t)|t|1/2 , at t = 0 [Ki2, 6.3.]. An element g ∈ G acts on G by inner
automorphism. The differential of this action is denoted by Ad(g). In this way G
acts on g, and this action is called the adjoint action of G on g.
   Let G be a connected simply connected nilpotent Lie group, and let g∗ be the
space of linear forms on the Lie algebra g of G. There is a natural action of G on g∗ .
It is called the coadjoint action of G. Using the theory of induced representations
(which we shall discuss a bit later in this section), Kirillov established a canonical
one-to-one mapping from the set of all coadjoint orbits onto the unitary dual of G

                                             b
                                      G\g∗ → G

which gives a simple description of the unitary dual. With a natural topology on the
left-hand side, this is a homeomorphism. Kirillov theory also gives the characters
of irreducible unitary representations and the Plancherel formula for nilpotent Lie
groups.
   In the second part of this section, we define some notions that we shall need in
the sequel.
   If G is a compact group, then each π ∈ G   b is given on a finite-dimensional space
[Di, 15.1.4.]. As in the theory of finite group representations, the function

                                 Θπ : g 7→ Trace π(g),

which is called the character of the representation π, completely determines the
              b We have a right Haar measure on G. Thus the character function
class of π in G.
determines a distribution on a compact Lie group G. It is easy to see that this
distribution is
                          f 7→ Trace π(f ), f ∈ Cc∞ (G),
which will be denoted by Θπ again. If π is an infinite-dimensional representation,
obviously the trace as a function is not well defined. Nevertheless, it may happen
that the above distribution is well defined. For an arbitrary Lie group G, one can
take the above distribution for the definition of the character of π ∈ G, b if π(f ) is
                      ∞                                   ∞
trace-class for f ∈ Cc (G). If π(f ) has a trace for f ∈ Cc (G), then π(f ) must be a
compact operator for any f ∈ L1 (G, µG ). If all π ∈ G b have characters in the above
sense, then π(f ) is a compact operator for any π ∈ G  b and f ∈ L1 (G, µG ).
   A locally compact group is called a CCR-group if π(f ) is a compact operator for
any π ∈ Gb and f ∈ L1 (G, µG ). All CCR-groups are of type I [Di, Proposition 4.3.4.
             AN EXTERNAL APPROACH TO UNITARY REPRESENTATIONS                         9

and Theorem 9.1]. A great number of very important groups are CCR-groups. The
most important classes of CCR-groups are commutative groups, compact groups,
nilpotent Lie groups, and reductive groups over local fields (reductive groups will be
defined in the appendix at the end of the following section). In particular, classical
groups over local fields are CCR-groups. One can characterize CCR-groups in terms
of the topology of the unitary duals. A group G is a CCR-group if and only if G   b is
                                                       b
a T1 -space, i.e., if the points are closed subsets of G [Di, 9.5.3.].
   For some important classes of groups one can show that they are CCR-groups by
showing that they have so-called “large” compact subgroups. Now we shall explain
the last notion.
   Let G be a locally compact unimodular group, and let K be a compact subgroup.
For δ ∈ Kb and a continuous representation (π, Hπ ) of G, let Hπ (δ) be the subspace
of Hπ spanned by all subrepresentations of π|K which are isomorphic to δ (here
π|K denotes the representation of K obtained by restriction from G). If

                                      dimC Hπ (δ) < ∞

            b then π is called a representation of G with finite K-multiplicities.
for all δ ∈ K,
   One calls K a large compact subgroup of G if for each δ ∈ K b the function

                                     π 7→ dimC Hπ (δ)

is a bounded function on G.  b If G has a large compact subgroup, then G is a CCR-
group [Di, Theorem 15.5.2]. Some very important classes of groups have large
compact subgroups, for example, reductive groups over local fields.
   For a continuous representation (π, H) of G, a vector v ∈ H is called K-finite if
the span of all π(k)v, k ∈ K, is finite dimensional.
   In the rest of this section we shall discuss some parts of the theory of the induced
representations for locally compact groups. The notion of induced representations
for locally compact groups generalizes the well-known notion of induced represen-
tations for finite groups that was introduced and studied by Frobenius and Schur.
Induction is one of the simplest and most important procedures for obtaining new
representations of locally compact groups.
   The most important case of induction for the purpose of this paper is parabolic
induction. To define this notion, it is enough to consider a closed subgroup P of
a unimodular group G and assume that there exists a compact subgroup K of G
such that P K = G. Let (σ, M ) be a continuous representation of P . The space of
all (classes of) measurable functions f : G → H which satisfy

                   f (pg) = ∆P (p)1/2 σ(p)f (g),        p ∈ P, g ∈ G,

and                                  Z
                         ||f ||2 =        ||f (k)||2 dµK (k) < ∞
                                      K

will be denoted by IndG P (σ). It is a Hilbert space. The group G acts by right
translations on IndG
                   P (σ). This action we denote by R. Thus

                                     (Rg f )(x) = f (xg).
10                                  MARKO TADIĆ


With this action, IndGP (σ) is a continuous representation of G. It is unitary if σ is
unitary.
   In our considerations G will be a reductive group over a local field, while P will
be a parabolic subgroup of G (these terms will be defined in the following section).
One will take a Levi decomposition P = M N of P and a continuous representation
σ of M . Since P/N ∼  = M , we shall consider σ as a representation of P . Then we
shall say that IndG
                  P (σ) is a parabolically induced representation of G by σ .
   We shall also talk at some points in this paper about induced representations
which are of more general type. Let G be a locally compact group which does
not need to be unimodular, and let C be a closed subgroup of G. Suppose that a
unitary representation (σ, H) of C is given (we may assume that σ is a continuous
representation only). We denote by IndG    C (σ) the space of all measurable functions
f : G → H which satisfy
              f (cg) = [∆C (c)∆G (g)−1 ]1/2 σ(c)f (g),    g ∈ G, c ∈ C.
One square integrability condition is required also. This condition is more technical
than in the case of parabolic induction [Ki2, 13.2]. Again G acts by right transla-
tions on IndG                                                                   G
              C (σ). This is a unitary representation of G. We say that IndC (σ) is
unitarily induced by σ.
   Mackey obtained a simple criterion for testing if a given unitary representation
of G is unitarily induced from C (Imprimitivity Theorem, [Ki2]). There is an im-
portant specialization of this theory. If G contains a nontrivial normal abelian
subgroup N , then Mackey theory implies a description of G     b by irreducible unitary
representations of smaller groups (G and N need to satisfy certain general topo-
logical conditions). Let χ ∈ N   b and denote by Gχ the stabilizer of χ in G (G acts
on Nb because G acts on N by automorphisms). Note that N          b consists of unitary
characters. Take an irreducible unitary representation σ of Gχ such that σ|N is a
multiple of χ. Then IndG    Gχ (σ) is an irreducible unitary representation of G. One
obtains all irreducible unitary representations of G by the above construction. Two
such representations constructed from χ1 , σ1 and χ2 , σ2 are equivalent if and only
if χ1 , σ1 and χ2 , σ2 are conjugate. This specialization of Mackey theory is usually
called small Mackey theory. In the special case when G is a semidirect product of
a closed normal abelian subgroup N and a closed subgroup M , the small Mackey
theory describes G   b more simply. Here G  b is parametrized by unitary characters of
N and irreducible unitary representations of their stabilizers in M , divided by a
natural equivalence.
   For our purpose, the case of semidirect products is the most interesting one. It is
important to observe that one obtains here automatically the irreducibility of some
induced representations. For a more detailed exposition of small Mackey theory,
one may consult [Ki2, 13.3].

         2. The nonunitary dual as a tool for the unitary dual
   In the study of the representation theory of the general linear groups, and more
generally, of the classical groups, the terminology of the theory of reductive groups
is very useful and natural. We shall very briefly recall some of the terminology of
this theory in the first part of the appendix at the end of this section. The reader
may also skip over the general definitions and follow only the case of GL(n) where
we shall not need these general definitions.
              AN EXTERNAL APPROACH TO UNITARY REPRESENTATIONS                          11

  We begin this section with a few definitions. We shall first define parabolic
subgroups in GL(n, F ). Take an ordered partition

                                    α = (n1 , n2 , . . . , nk )

of n. Consider block-matrices
                                                                 
                              A11           .   .   .   .   . A1k
                             .             .   .   .   .   .  . 
                                                                 
                             .             .   .   .   .   .  . 
                          A=                                     
                             .             .   .   .   .   .  . 
                                                                 
                               .            .   .   .   .   .  .
                              Ak1           .   .   .   .   . Akk

where Aij is an ni by nj matrix. Denote

                      Pα = {A ∈ GL(n, F ); Aij = 0 for i > j},

                      Mα = {A ∈ GL(n, F ); Aij = 0 for i 6= j}.
Let Nα be the set of all A ∈ Pα such that all Aii are identity matrices. Now Pα is
called a standard parabolic subgroup of GL(n, F ), Mα is called a Levi factor of Pα ,
and Nα is called the unipotent radical of Pα . The subgroup P(1,1,...,1) of all upper
triangular matrices in GL(n, F ) is called the standard minimal parabolic subgroup.
   Take any g ∈ GL(n, F ) and any ordered partition α = (n1 , n2 , . . . , nk ) of n.
Then gPα g −1 is called a parabolic subgroup of GL(n, F ). Set P ′ = gPα g −1 , M ′ =
gMα g −1 , and N ′ = gNα g −1 . Then P ′ = M ′ N ′ is called a Levi decomposition of P ′ .
The group M ′ is called a Levi factor of P ′ , and N ′ is called the unipotent radical
of P ′ . Similarly, a minimal parabolic subgroup is defined to be any conjugate of
the standard minimal parabolic subgroup.
   We shall now introduce the nonunitary dual. We denote by G a reductive group
over a local field F . There exists a maximal compact subgroup K of G such that
Pmin K = G for some minimal parabolic subgroup Pmin of G. We fix such a maximal
compact subgroup. The Iwasawa decomposition Pmin K = G holds for any maximal
compact subgroup K of G if F is an archimedean field. If it is not, this may not be
true for all maximal compact subgroups. The group K is a large compact subgroup
of G in the sense of the previous section. In the case of GL(n, F ) and F = R (resp.
F = C), one may take for K the group of orthogonal matrices (resp. the group
of unitary matrices). If F is nonarchimedean, one may take K in GL(n, F ) to be
GL(n, OF ), where OF is the ring of integers in F , that is, OF = {x ∈ F ; |x|F ≤ 1}.
In a general linear group over any local field, all maximal compact subgroups are
conjugate.
   We shall always assume in the sequel that continuous representations of G that
we consider have finite K-multiplicities.
   For a continuous representation π of G, we have denoted by Φ(π) the linear span
of all matrix coefficients of π. This is a subspace of C(G). Denote by Cl Φ(π) the
closure of Φ(π) with respect to the open-compact topology on C(G). Then two
continuous representations π1 and π2 of G are said to be functional equivalent if

                                 Cl Φ(π1 ) = Cl Φ(π2 ).
12                                  MARKO TADIĆ


We denote by G  e the set of all functional equivalence classes of continuous irreducible
representations of G which have finite K-multiplicities. These representations are
precisely the topologically completely irreducible representations of G (for a def-
inition of the last notion, one may consult [Wr, 4.2.2.]). The set G      e is called the
nonunitary dual of G. We could use Naimark equivalence to define G          e instead of
the functional equivalence. We would get the same object. Two continuous repre-
sentations (π1 , H1 ) and (π2 , H2 ) are called Naimark equivalent if there exist dense
subspaces V1 ⊆ H1 and V2 ⊆ H2 which are invariant for integrated forms and a
closed one-to-one linear operator ϕ from V1 onto V2 such that

                              (π2 (f )ϕ)(x) = (ϕπ1 (f ))(x)

for any f ∈ Cc (G), x ∈ V1 .
   For an irreducible continuous representation π of G which has finite K-multiplicities,
the operator π(f ) is of trace-class if f ∈ Cc∞ (G). The linear form

                                   f 7→ Trace(π(f ))

is denoted by Θπ and called the character of the representation π. Two irreducible
continuous representations with finite K-multiplicities are functionally equivalent
if and only if they have the same characters. Furthermore, characters of represen-
tations from G     e are linearly independent.
    The natural mapping G       b→G  e is one-to-one (G is a CCR-group). Therefore, we
shall identify G    b with a subset of G.e A class π ∈ G e will be called unitarizable or
                     b   e                 e
unitary if π ∈ G ⊆ G. One supplies G with a topology in the same way as we have
supplied G  b with the topology of the unitary dual.
    The reader may consult the second part of the appendix at the end of this section
for standard realizations of the set G.    e Those realizations depend on whether the
field is archimedean or not.
    The idea of Harish-Chandra was to break the problem of describing G       b into two
parts: the problem of the nonunitary dual and the unitarizability problem. The
problem of determining the nonunitary dual appeared to be much more manageable
than the unitarizability problem.
    Besides the above general strategy, there could be other strategies for getting G. b
It would be interesting to obtain a classification of the unitary duals dealing with
nonunitary representations as little as possible or perhaps not at all. A strategy
of such classification for GL(n) over archimedean fields dealing with only unitary
representations can be based on a paper from 1962 by Kirillov [Ki1]. We shall
return to [Ki1] in §9. Now we shall outline the strategy.
    Let Pn be the subgroup of GL(n, F ) of all matrices with the bottom row equal
to (0, 0, . . . , 0, 1). An interesting property of Pn follows from the small Mackey
theory: Pbn is in a bijection with

     GL(n − 1, F )ˆ ∪ GL(n − 2, F )ˆ ∪ · · · ∪ GL(2, F )ˆ ∪ GL(1, F )ˆ ∪ GL(0, F )ˆ

(GL(0, F ) denotes the trivial group). Gelfand and Naimark showed already in 1950
that certain irreducible unitary representations of SL(n, C), which they expected
to exhaust SL(n, C)ˆ, remain irreducible as representations of Pn′ where Pn′ de-
notes the subgroup of SL(n, C) of all matrices with the bottom row of the form
              AN EXTERNAL APPROACH TO UNITARY REPRESENTATIONS                          13

(0, . . . , 0, x), x ∈ C× . They obtained this result from the explicit formulas for those
representations. Kirillov’s idea was to first find a general proof of the irreducibility
of π|Pn for π ∈ GL(n, F )ˆ when F = R or C. Then one has an inductive procedure
for classification. After classifying GL(m, F )ˆ for m ≤ n − 1, one also has a classifi-
cation of Pbn by the above remark about Pbn . Thus, the second part of the strategy is
to find all possible extensions of representations from Pbn to unitary representations
of GL(n, F ). This strategy was used by I. J. Vahutinskii in his study of irreducible
unitary representations of GL(3, R).
   At the end of this section we shall say a few words about the characteristics
of some approaches to the unitary duals of certain groups in two relatively simple
cases.
   We shall first consider the case of a compact Lie group G. We shall assume that
G is connected. One starts from an irreducible unitary representation (π, H) of
G, and studying the internal structure of H, one comes to exact parameters which
classify G   b . Let us give a rough idea of how this approach goes. A closed connected
commutative subgroup of G is called a torus in G. Each torus is isomorphic to some
Tn where T is the group of all complex numbers of norm one. We fix a maximal
torus T in G. Then each element of G is conjugate to an element of T , i.e., each
conjugacy class of G intersects T . Suppose that π is a continuous representation
of G on a finite-dimensional space H. One can choose an inner product on H
invariant for the action of G. Thus the representation π|T decomposes into a direct
sum of some unitary characters χ1 , . . . , χm . These unitary characters are called the
weights of π with respect to T . Take now (π, H) ∈ G.      b We have already mentioned
that the character Θπ of the representation π determines the class of π. Since the
character Θπ , as a function on G, is obviously constant on conjugacy classes, π is
already determined by π|T , i.e., π is determined by its weights. Further analysis of
the structure of the representation π on H requires the study of the representation
of the Lie algebra (the formula (L.A.) in the appendix at the end of this section,
defines the action of the Lie algebra). It gives that there is a particular weight
among all weights of π which already characterizes π (the highest weight). In this
way one obtains a parametrization of G      b by a certain subset of characters of T (the
dominant weights). For an exposition of this nice theory of Weyl and Cartan, one
may consult, among many nice expositions, the seventh paragraph of [Bu1].
   We shall present now a simple strategy for solving the unitarizability problem for
G = SL(2, R). One may take for K the group SO(2) of all two-by-two orthogonal
matrices of determinant one. Note that SO(2) ∼      = T . The unitary dual of K is given
by the characters                                     
                                      cos(ϕ) −sin(ϕ)
                               σn :                      7→ einϕ ,
                                      sin(ϕ) cos(ϕ)

when n runs over Z. If (π, H) ∈ G, e then it is not hard to show that multiplicities
of the representation π|K are one, i.e., H(σn ) are either zero- or one-dimensional
subspaces. This can be seen in a similar way as one shows that the space of K-
invariant vectors in an irreducible representation is one dimensional if (G, K) is a
Gelfand pair [GfGrPi, Chapter III, §3, no. 4]. Thus, there is a basis {vn ; n ∈ S} of
the Hilbert space H, parametrized by a subset S of Z. Suppose that π is a unitary
representation with a G-invariant inner product ( , ) on H. The formula (L.A.)
from the appendix defines the representation of the Lie algebra g of G on K-finite
vectors. Differentiating the relation (π(g)v, π(g)w) = (v, w), g ∈ G, along one-
14                                  MARKO TADIĆ


parameter subgroups, one gets that the representation on K-finite vectors satisfies

                             (π(X)v, w) = −(v, π(X)w)

for all X ∈ g. Put ||vn || = cn . Since vn , n ∈ S, are orthogonal, the inner product
is completely determined by numbers cn , n ∈ S. One can solve the unitarizability
problem in the following way. Take (π, H) ∈ G      e and check if there exist positive
numbers cn , n ∈ S, such that the inner product
                          X             X         X
                               λi vi ,       µi vi =  c2i λi µ̄i

satisfies (π(X)v, w) + (v, π(X)w) = 0 for all K-finite vectors v and w in H and all
X ∈ g. All π for which there exist such numbers form the unitary dual. Clearly,
to be able to solve the above problem, we need to know explicitly the internal
structure of irreducible representations of G.
   In the above two examples, one solves the problem by study of the internal
structure of representations.

                                         Appendix
Algebraic groups. We shall recall very briefly in the first part of this appen-
dix some definitions from the theory of algebraic groups. For precise definitions
containing all details, one should consult [Bl].
   A linear algebraic group G is a Zariski closed subgroup of some general linear
group with entries from an algebraically closed field. A linear algebraic group is
called unipotent if it is conjugate to a subgroup of the upper triangular unipotent
matrices. A linear algebraic group G is called reductive if G does not contain a
normal Zariski closed unipotent subgroup of positive dimension. A linear algebraic
group G is called semisimple if it is reductive and if it has a finite center. If a
noncommutative linear algebraic group G does not contain a proper normal Zariski
closed subgroup of positive dimension, then G is called a simple algebraic group. If
                                                     n
there is a group isomorphism of G onto some GL(1) which is also an isomorphism
of algebraic varieties, then G is called a torus.
   A Zariski closed subgroup P of G is called a parabolic subgroup if the homoge-
neous space G/P is a projective variety.
   By a reductive group, we shall mean the group G(F ) of all F -rational points of
a reductive group G which is defined as an algebraic variety over a local field F .
By a parabolic subgroup of a reductive group G(F ), we shall mean the group of all
rational points of a parabolic subgroup of G, which is defined over F . A minimal
parabolic subgroup of G(F ) is a parabolic subgroup which does not contain any
other parabolic subgroup. All minimal parabolic subgroups in G(F ) are conjugate.
If we fix a minimal parabolic subgroup Pmin of G(F ), then the parabolic subgroups
containing Pmin are called standard parabolic subgroups. Each parabolic subgroup
in G(F ) is conjugate to a standard parabolic subgroup. Let P be a parabolic
subgroup of G(F ). Among Zariski connected normal unipotent subgroups of P
there is the maximal one. It is called the unipotent radical of P . Denote it by N .
There exists a reductive subgroup M of P such that P = M N and M ∩ N = {1}.
Note that P is then a semidirect product of N and M . One says that P = M N is
a Levi decomposition of P . Also, one says that M is a Levi factor of P .
             AN EXTERNAL APPROACH TO UNITARY REPRESENTATIONS                        15

   Since a reductive group G(F ) is a closed subgroup of GL(n, F ), G(F ) is in a
natural way a locally compact group. If F is an archimedean field (i.e., F = R or
C), then G(F ) is a Lie group in a natural way. If F is a nonarchimedean field, then
G(F ) is a totally disconnected group.
   In the sequel, a reductive group G(F ) will usually be denoted simply by G.
   The most important examples of reductive groups are the classical groups such
as general linear groups GL(n, F ), special linear groups, symplectic groups and
orthogonal groups. The groups GL(n, F ) form the simplest series of reductive
groups and one of the first series to be considered.
   Even if one is interested in harmonic analysis on some particular class of classical
groups, it is usually necessary to study a broader class of groups because some
important constructions involve subgroups which may not belong to the considered
class. Such subgroups are reductive. This is the reason why it is convenient to
use the terminology of reductive groups even if we consider some specific class of
groups.
Realizations of G. e The set Ge has the following realizations, depending on whether
the field is archimedean or not. We shall not use these realizations in the sequel, so
the reader can also skip over these definitions. We note that the following notions
                                                                               e looks
are very important in the theory. It is also interesting to note how different G
in the following archimedean and nonarchimedean realizations.
   Suppose that F is an archimedean field. First, we shall give a definition of a
(g, K)-module (g is the Lie algebra of G). A representation π of a Lie algebra g is
a real-linear map from g into the space of all linear operators on a complex vector
space V such that
                        π([X, Y ]) = π(X)π(Y ) − π(Y )π(X)

for any X, Y ∈ g. If we have a Lie group G and a continuous representation π of G
on a finite-dimensional space V , then the following limit exists

                                   d
(L.A.)                 π(X)v =        [π(x(t)v)]t=0 ,   v ∈ V,
                                   dt

and it defines a representation of the Lie algebra g of G on V (in the above formula
X ∈ g and X is the tangent vector to the curve x(t) at t = 0). We call this Lie
algebra representation the differential of π. Suppose now that G is a reductive
group over F and k the Lie algebra of K. Let (π, V ) be a pair where V is a
complex vector space and π = (πg , πK ) is again a pair consisting of a Lie algebra
representation πg of g on V and of a representation πK of K on V , such that the
following three conditions are satisfied.
   (a) For each v ∈ V the vector space W spanned by all πK (k)v, k ∈ K, is finite
       dimensional and the representation of K on W is continuous.
   (b) The differential of the representation πK of K equals the restriction of the
       Lie algebra representation πg to k.
   (c) For any k ∈ K, X ∈ g, and v ∈ V

                      πg (Ad(k)X)v = πK (k)πg (X)πK (k −1 )v.
16                                   MARKO TADIĆ


Then (π, V ) is called a (g, K)-module. An irreducible (g, K)-module is a (g, K)-
module which has no nontrivial subspaces invariant both for actions of K and g.
Two (g, K)-modules (π ′ , V ′ ) and (π ′′ , V ′′ ) are equivalent if there is a one-to-one
linear mapping ϕ from V ′ onto V ′′ such that ϕπK         ′
                                                            (k) = πK′′
                                                                       (k)ϕ and ϕπg′ (X) =
  ′′
πg (X)ϕ for any k ∈ K and X ∈ g. Now G            e is in a natural bijection with the set
of all equivalence classes of irreducible (g, K)-modules. If (π, H) is an irreducible
continuous representation of G (with finite K-multiplicities, which we always as-
sume), then one takes for V the space of all K-finite vectors in H. The formula
(L.A.) defines an action of g on V , and V becomes an irreducible (g, K)-module in
this way.
     Suppose now that F is nonarchimedean. A representation (π, V ) of G is called
smooth if for each v ∈ V there is an open subgroup Kv of G such that π(k)v = v
for any k ∈ Kv . Again we say that smooth representation (π, V ) is irreducible if
there is no nontrivial vector subspace invariant for the action of G. Two smooth
representations (π1 , V1 ) and (π2 , V2 ) of G are equivalent if there exists a one-to-
one linear map ϕ from V1 onto V2 such that π2 (g)ϕ = ϕπ1 (g) for any g ∈ G.
As before, there is a natural one-to-one correspondence from G            e onto the set of
all equivalence classes of irreducible smooth representations of G. If (π, H) is an
irreducible continuous representation of G, one takes again for V the space of all
K-finite vectors v in H. Now the restriction of the action of G on H to V defines
an irreducible smooth representation of G on V .

        3. Some simple constructions of unitary representations
   One would like to have rather simple and natural constructions of unitary repre-
                                       b For nilpotent Lie groups such a systematic
sentations which produce the whole of G.
procedure consists of unitary induction by one-dimensional unitary representations.
For the groups we consider, the situation is not so simple, but it is not too bad
either. For example, one obtains the whole of SL(n, C)ˆ by parabolic induction with
one-dimensional, in general nonunitary, representations (see §9).
   We have introduced the topology of G    b in §1. In the construction of new uni-
tary representations, the hardest problem is to find new connected components of
b Since G
G.          b is not topologically homogeneous, there may exist special connected
components, those consisting of only one point. These representations are usually
called isolated representations. To avoid the influence of the commutative harmonic
analysis coming from Gab = G/Gder where Gder denotes the derived group of G,
we shall define the notion of representations isolated modulo center. Let Z(G) be
the center of G. For (π, H) ∈ G   e there exists a character ωπ ∈ Z(G)˜ such that
π(z) = ωπ (z) idH for all z ∈ Z(G). The character ωπ is called the central character
of π. For a character ω ∈ Z(G)˜ set
                    eω = {π ∈ G;
                    G         e ωπ = ω}             bω = G
                                                and G    eω ∩ G.
                                                              b

The representation π ∈ Gb (resp. π ∈ G)e will be called isolated modulo center (resp.
isolated modulo center in the nonunitary dual ) if {π} is an open subset of G    b ωπ
(resp. an open subset of Ge ωπ ). In the sequel, by isolated representation we shall
mean isolated modulo center. According to what we have said about the topology
    b we may say roughly that matrix coefficients of isolated representations are
of G,
not similar to other matrix coefficients of elements of G.b The following example
             AN EXTERNAL APPROACH TO UNITARY REPRESENTATIONS                        17

indicates that. If G is compact, then G     b is discrete, and matrix coefficients of
                                2
different representations are L -orthogonal. Kazhdan proved in [Ka] that the trivial
representation is isolated when G is a simple group of split rank n ≥ 2. The split
rank is the highest n such that G possesses a Zariski closed subgroup defined over F
which is isomorphic over F to GL(1, F )n . As opposed to the trivial representation,
other isolated representations are usually not easily constructible. In fact, isolated
representations of Gb or G
                         e are very distinguished representations in known examples.
Certainly, each isolated representation in the nonunitary dual, which is unitary, is
also isolated in the unitary dual.
   The first isolated representations that one usually meets in the representation
theory of reductive groups are square integrable. An irreducible unitary represen-
tation (π, H) of G is called square integrable modulo center if for any v, w ∈ H, the
function
                                   g 7→ |(π(g)v, w)|
is a square integrable function on G/Z(G) with respect to a Haar measure. We
shall use the term square integrable instead of square integrable modulo center .
                                         e may be obtained from the above square
Actually, the unitarity of some (π, H) ∈ G
integrability condition (note that the unitarity of the central character of π must
be assumed to be able to formulate the above square integrability condition). The
square integrable representations are crucial for Plancherel measure and important
for parametrizing the nonunitary dual. In known examples, they are very often
isolated (in the unitary dual).
   The known examples show that the construction of a connected component, or
at least a big part of it, reduces to the construction of isolated representations
of reductive subgroups of G attached to parabolic subgroups and some standard
simple and well-known constructions. Now we shall recall these standard simple
constructions. The first and the oldest one is:
(a) Unitary parabolic induction. Let P = M N be a Levi decomposition of a para-
bolic subgroup P of G. For a continuous representation σ of M , we have considered
σ also as a representation of P using the projection P = M N → P/N ∼       = M. Then
IndGP (σ) was called a parabolically  induced  representation of G.  If σ is a unitary
representation, then this process will be called unitary parabolic induction. In fact,
we always take σ ∈ M c. Then IndG (σ) is a unitary representation which is a direct
                                  P
sum of finitely many irreducible representations. It is usually irreducible. In the
construction (a), we shall always assume that P is a proper subgroup of G. In
general, if ( , ) is an M -invariant hermitian form on the representation space U
of σ, then                          Z
                         (f1 , f2 ) 7→       (f1 (k), f2 (k)) dµK (k)
                                         K

is a G-invariant hermitian form on IndG  P (σ), and it is positive definite if the form
on U was positive definite.
   Unitary parabolic induction has been used since the first classification of the
unitary duals of reductive groups [Bg], [GfN1]. Gelfand and Naimark started to use
systematically unitary parabolic induction for the classical simple complex groups,
while Harish-Chandra started a systematic study of this induction.
   The following construction was used also in the first classifications of unitary
duals of reductive groups [Bg, GfN1].
18                                   MARKO TADIĆ


(b) Complementary series. It happens that some representations induced by nonuni-
tary ones become unitary after a new inner product is introduced on the representa-
tion space. The idea is the following. One realizes on the same space a “continuous”
family (πα , Hα ), α ∈ X, of irreducible induced representations which possess G-
invariant nontrivial hermitian forms. Let X be connected. Suppose that some πα
is unitary. The fact that a continuous family of nondegenerate hermitian forms on
a finite-dimensional space parametrized by X, being positive definite at one point
of X, must be positive definite everywhere enables one to conclude that all con-
structed representations are in Gb (here one reduces arguments to finite-dimensional
                               L
spaces by considering spaces                                                      b
                                  H(δ), where δ runs over fixed finite subsets of K).
Positivity at one point is obtained in general from (a). The delicate point is the
construction of a continuous family of G-invariant hermitian forms, and it is based
on the theory of intertwining operators for induced representations.
   For the above construction some authors use the term deformation [Vo4]. We
have chosen rather a more traditional name.
   Let us recall that a topological space X is quasi-compact if each open covering
of X contains a finite open subcovering. Note that in the above definition of a
quasi-compact topological space, the Hausdorff property is not required (this is the
difference between quasi-compactness and compactness). A topological space is lo-
cally quasi-compact if each point has a fundamental set of neighborhoods which are
quasi-compact. The fundamental fact about the topology of G    b (actually, about the
dual of any C ∗ -algebra) is local quasi-compactness. This fact essentially, together
with some understanding of the topology of the unitary dual, implies that G  b cannot
be complete without
(c) Irreducible subquotients of ends of complementary series. This fact was first
observed and proved by Miličić. Before we give a brief argument why the rep-
                                         b we shall give a simple but suggestive
resentations in (c) must be included in G,
example.
   Let P be a minimal parabolic subgroup in G = GL(2, F ) (one may take for P the
upper triangular matrices in G). We have denoted by ∆P the modular character
of P . Representations

                        I α = IndG   α
                                 P (∆P ),      −1/2 < α < 1/2

are irreducible. If α = 0, then I 0 is unitary by (a) (∆0P is the trivial representation,
so it is unitary). The family I α , −1/2 < α < 1/2, is a “continuous” family of
irreducible representations with nondegenerate G-invariant hermitian forms. Thus,
they belong to G b by (b).
   We shall pay attention now to the representation at the end of these complemen-
                               −1/2
tary series I −1/2 = IndG P (∆P     ). From the definition of I −1/2 , it follows that the
trivial representation of G is a subrepresentation of I −1/2 (the trivial representa-
tion of some group G is a representation on a one-dimensional space V where each
element acts as the identity on V ). This is the unique proper nontrivial subrepre-
sentation of I −1/2 . Since I −1/2 is infinite dimensional, there is no inner product on
I −1/2 for which I −1/2 is a unitary representation (in a unitary representation for
each subrepresentation there is another subrepresentation on the orthogonal com-
plement). Nevertheless, the representation on the quotient of I −1/2 by the trivial
representation is unitary (actually, it is square integrable, and this implies that it
             AN EXTERNAL APPROACH TO UNITARY REPRESENTATIONS                          19

is unitary). So, though I −1/2 is not unitary, each irreducible subquotient of the
representation at the end of the complementary series is unitary. This is the case
in general.
    The representation I −1/2 from the above considerations is a representation which
is not irreducible, but also, it is not very far from being irreducible. This is an exam-
ple of a representation of finite length. Before we proceed further with explanation
of the construction (c), we shall recall the definition of a representation of finite
length. Suppose that we have a continuous representation (π, H) of a reductive
group G, which has finite K-multiplicities. Then we say that π is of finite length if
there exist subrepresentations

                          {0} = H0 ⊆ H1 ⊆ · · · ⊆ Hn = H

of H, such that the quotient representations of G on Hi /Hi−1 are irreducible rep-
resentations of G, for i = 1, 2, . . . , n. Parabolic induction carries the continuous
representations of M of finite length to the continuous representations of G of
finite length.
   Now we shall give a brief argument for the unitarity of representations in (c).
We shall omit technical details. Suppose that we have a complementary series of
representations πα , α ∈ X. We may consider the following situation. Let Y be a
topological space with a countable basis of open sets, and let X be a dense subset
of Y . Assume that to each α ∈ Y is attached a nontrivial continuous representation
πα of G of finite length such that the functions

                              α 7→ Θπα (ϕ),         Y →C

are continuous, for all ϕ from the space Cc,∗ (G) of all continuous compactly sup-
ported functions which span a finite-dimensional space after translations by el-
ements of K (left and right). Suppose also that the πα are irreducible unitary
representations for all α ∈ X. Take any α ∈ Y . Let (αn ) be a sequence in X
converging to α. Miličić proved that in general a sequence (πn ) in G  b has no accu-
mulation points if and only if limn Θπn (ϕ) = 0 for all ϕ [Mi, Corollary of Theorem
6]. Since Θπα 6≡ 0, (παn ) has a convergent subsequence. If S is the set of all limits
of subsequences of (παn ) in G,b then Miličić’s description of the topology of G
                                                                                 b says
that there exist positive integers nσ , σ ∈ S, such that
                                              X
                            limn Θπαn (ϕ) =         nσ Θσ (ϕ)
                                              σ∈S

for all ϕ in Cc,∗ (G) [Mi, Theorems 6 and 7]. Also, S is a discrete and closed subset
   b Thus
of G.                                   X
                              Θπα (ϕ) =       nσ Θσ (ϕ)
                                          σ∈S

for all ϕ in Cc,∗ (G). Since the character of πα is the sum of characters of its
irreducible subquotients, one can obtain easily that S is precisely the set of all
                                            b each irreducible subquotient of πα is
irreducible subquotients of πα . Since S ⊆ G,
unitary. Thus (c) provides unitary classes.
   For a direct proof without use of the topology, one may consult [Td5]. The proof
is based on the fact that a group of unitary operators on finite-dimensional Hilbert
20                                   MARKO TADIĆ


space is finite dimensional. One uses in the proof the fact that reductive groups
have large compact subgroups.
    While the constructions of (a) and (b) provide bigger continuous families of uni-
tary representations, (c) provides smaller families, but they are often important in
the construction of unitary representations. Representations obtained by construc-
tions (a), (b), or (c) are never isolated. We shall describe now a simple construction
found by Speh that may produce isolated representations. This construction is par-
ticularly useful when it is combined with some other constructions, for example,
with (a), (b), and (c). Contrary to previous constructions, here one gets unitarity of
representations of smaller groups from unitarity of representations of bigger groups.
Before we describe the construction, we need a notion of hermitian contragradient.
    For a continuous representation (π, H) of G, π̄ will denote the complex conjugate
of π. It is the same representation, but the Hilbert space is the complex conju-
gate of H. The contragradient representation of π will be denoted by π        e . It is the
representation on the space of all continuous linear forms on H with the action
 π (g)f ](v) = f (π(g −1 )v). Set π + = π.
[e                                      ē Then π + will be called hermitian contragra-
dient of π. A continuous irreducible representation π will be called hermitian if π
and π + are in the same class in G.  e It is easy to see that all unitary representations
are hermitian. In the classifications of G   e it is usually easy to check whether π is
hermitian or not.
    Let P = M N be a proper parabolic subgroup of G. It is very easy to prove the
following fact:

(d) Unitary parabolic reduction. If we have hermitian σ ∈ M   f such that IndG (σ) is
                                                                                 P
                                  e is unitarizable, then the class of σ is unitarizable
irreducible and that its class in G
too.
   We shall now give a rough argument explaining why (d) provides unitarizable
representations. Let (σ, H) be an irreducible nonunitarizable hermitian represen-
tation of M . Then there is a nondegenerate M -invariant hermitian form ψ on H.
Now H decomposes H = H+ ⊕ H− as a representation of K ∩P , where ψ is positive
definite on H+ and negative definite on H− . Clearly, H+ 6= {0} and H− 6= {0}.
Note that IndG               K
              P (σ) and IndK∩P (σ|K ∩ P ) are isomorphic as representations of K
and
                IndK (σ|K ∩ P ) ∼
                    K∩P              = IndK (H+ ) ⊕ IndK (H− ).
                                             K∩P              K∩P

Since unitary induction carries unitary representations to unitary, we see that the
hermitian form induced by ψ is indefinite. This form is also G-invariant. Since
a G-invariant hermitian form on an irreducible representation is unique up to a
scalar, we see that if IndGP (σ) is irreducible, then it is not unitarizable.
   Roughly speaking, the construction (d) enables one to construct sometimes from
a component of M   c1 a component of M      c2 , where Pi = Mi Ni are two parabolic
subgroups of G.
   There are also some simple constructions based on the geometry of a group or
groups. For example, if σi ∈ G  b i , then σ1 ⊗ σ2 ∈ (G1 × G2 )ˆ (and conversely). There
are also irreducible unitary representations which appear already in the classifica-
tion of the nonunitary dual—the square integrable ones.
   It is interesting to ask which constructions must be added to (a)–(d) to gener-
ate the whole unitary dual of the classical groups, starting with square integrable
              AN EXTERNAL APPROACH TO UNITARY REPRESENTATIONS                          21

representations. We shall see that for the first class, the case of GL(n, F ), the
constructions (a)–(d) are enough.
Remarks. (1) Fell introduced in [Fe] a notion of nonunitary dual space for arbi-
trary locally compact group. It is a topological space consisting of so-called linear
system representations. We have studied G    e as a topological space in [Td6] if G is
a reductive group over a nonarchimedean field F . It was shown that G          e coincides
                                           b                            e
with Fell’s nonunitary dual. The set G is a closed subset of G. A representa-
tion π ∈ G  e is isolated modulo center if and only if there is a nontrivial matrix
coefficient which is compactly supported modulo center. Therefore, one may in-
terpret Jacquet’s subrepresentation theorem [Cs, Theorem 5.1.2] in the following
way. Each element of G   e can be obtained as a subrepresentation of IndG (σ), with σ
                                                                             P
isolated modulo center representation of M for some parabolic subgroup P = M N
of G. Each isolated modulo center representation of G in G        e is essentially unitary
(i.e., it becomes unitary after twisting by a suitable character of G); actually it is
essentially square integrable. Certainly, all these facts about the topology of the
nonunitary dual should hold over archimedean fields with the proofs along the same
lines. In the archimedean case, the representations with matrix coefficients com-
pactly supported modulo center can exist only if G/Z(G) is compact. Construction
of representations of such groups is essentially solved by the case of compact Lie
groups.
    (2) Suppose that F is nonarchimedean. Let P = M N be a parabolic subgroup
in G. Let σ ∈ M   f be isolated modulo center. Denote by 0 G the set of all g ∈ G
such that the absolute value of µ(g) is one for any homomorphism µ : G → F ×
which is also a morphism of algebraic varieties defined over F . Then a character
χ : G → C× is called unramified if χ is trivial on 0 G, i.e., if χ(0 G) = {1}. Let U (M )
be the set of all unramified characters of M . Then U (M )σ = {χσ; χ ∈ U (M )} is a
connected component of M    f containing σ, and the set of all irreducible subquotients
        G
of IndP (τ ), τ ∈ U (M )σ, is a connected component of G. e All connected components
of G e are obtained in this way [Td6]. So, for G  e the set of connected components
reduces to the set of isolated representations modulo center in the nonunitary dual
of the reductive parts of parabolic subgroups. Note that a difficult problem in the
nonarchimedean case is the construction of representations isolated modulo center
(i.e., of supercuspidal representations).

                           4. Completeness argument
   In the last section, we have outlined constructions (a)–(d) of unitary representa-
tions of a reductive group G. It seems that those constructions provide a remarkable
part of the unitary duals of the classical groups. This leads to one of the most in-
teresting questions about unitary representations of reductive groups: How can one
conclude that a set X ⊆ G   b is a significant piece of G,
                                                         b or even all of it? At the
present time there is no satisfactory strategy for answering such density questions.
Recall the simple answer for finite groups: One needs to check if the sum of squares
of degrees of representations in X is equal to the order of the group or not.
   Suppose that a set X ⊆ G    b is constructed and suppose also that one expects
that it is the whole unitary dual. If one wants to prove that, then a usual strategy
                            e
has been to prove that in G\X    all representations are nonunitarizable. One checks
                             e
for each representation in G\X    that it cannot be unitarizable considering various
22                                  MARKO TADIĆ


properties of that representation. The simplest properties that one can consider
are: if the representation is hermitian, if it has bounded matrix coefficients, etc.
The construction (d) can be used also for getting nonunitarity (from M  f to G).
                                                                              e The
above strategy we shall call the indirect strategy (of proving completeness of a given
set of unitary representations).
   The indirect strategy becomes less satisfactory for groups of larger size. At the
same time, the indirect strategy is not completely satisfactory from the point of
view of harmonic analysis: the stress is not on unitary representations, which are of
the principal interest, but on nonunitary ones. Actually, one needs a very detailed
knowledge of the structure of representations in G\ e G,b and the set G\
                                                                       e G
                                                                         b is usually
much, much larger than the set G.  b The indirect strategy does not develop directly
the intuition about unitary representations. In dealing with G,   e it is very useful
                                                              e
to algebracize the situation (the algebraic description of G was presented in the
appendix at the end of §2).
   Later on we shall present a completeness argument for GL(n), dealing simulta-
neously with all GL(n) and having only one argument rather than various cases.
This will be an example of the direct strategy of proving completeness.
   In the following section we shall explain the sense in which the set of represen-
tations of Gelfand, Naimark, and Stein is “big”.

      5. On the completeness argument: the example of GL(n, C)
   We shall first introduce some general notation for the general linear group and
then pass to the complex case.
   In the first part of this section, F denotes any local field.
   For x ∈ F × , there exists a number |x|F > 0 such that
                               Z                   Z
                         |x|F      f (xg) da (g) =   f (g) da (g)
                               F                   F

for all f ∈ Cc (G) (da (g) denotes an additive invariant measure on F ). Set |0|F = 0.
Then | |F is called the modulus of F . Note that | |R is the usual absolute value
on R, | |C is the square of the usual absolute value on C (i.e., |z|C = z z̄), while
|x|Qp = |x|p (see the Introduction). For g ∈ GL(n, F ) set
                                   ν(g) = | det(g)|F .
Clearly, ν : GL(n, F ) → R× is a character.
    For n1 , n2 ∈ Z+ , we have denoted by P(n1 ,n2 ) the parabolic subgroup of GL(n1 +
n2 , F ) consisting of the elements g = (gij ) for which gij = 0 when i > n1 and j ≤ n1 .
Also we have denoted M(n1 ,n2 ) = {(gij ) ∈ P(n1 ,n2 ) ; gij = 0 for j > n1 and i ≤
n1 }. Then
                            M(n1 ,n2 ) ∼
                                       = GL(n1 , F ) × GL(n2 , F )
is a Levi factor of P(n1 ,n2 ) .
   For two continuous representations τi of GL(ni ; F ), i = 1, 2, we consider τ1 ⊗ τ2
as a representation of M(n1 ,n2 ) ∼= GL(n1 , F ) × GL(n2 , F ) in a natural way. The
mapping mn 7→ (τ1 ⊗ τ2 )(m), where m ∈ M(n1 ,n2 ) and n ∈ N(n1 ,n2 ) , defines a
representation of P(n1 ,n2 ) . This representation of P(n1 ,n2 ) was again denoted by
τ1 ⊗ τ2 . Thus                            
                                    g    ∗
                         τ1 ⊗ τ2 : 1         7→ τ1 (g1 ) ⊗ τ2 (g2 )
                                    0 g2
             AN EXTERNAL APPROACH TO UNITARY REPRESENTATIONS                         23

for g1 ∈ GL(n1 , F ) and g2 ∈ GL(n2 , F ). Now the parabolically induced represen-
tation
                                 GL(n +n ,F )
                              IndP(n ,n1 ) 2 (τ1 ⊗ τ2 )
                                      1   2

will be denoted by τ1 × τ2 . It is a standard fact that (τ1 × τ2 ) × τ3 is isomorphic to
τ1 × (τ2 × τ3 ) (i.e., there exists a continuous intertwining which is invertible). This
is a consequence of a general theorem on induction in stages

                            IndH      H2      ∼    H3
                               H2 (IndH1 (σ)) = IndH1 (σ).
                                3



Therefore, it makes sense to write τ1 × τ2 × τ3 .
   Before we explain an important property of the operation ×, we need the notion
of associate parabolic subgroups and associate representations. Suppose that we
have two parabolic subgroups P1 and P2 of some reductive group G. If we have Levi
decompositions P1 = M1 N1 , P2 = M2 N2 , and w ∈ G such that M2 = wM1 w−1 ,
then we say that P1 and P2 are associate parabolic subgroups. Suppose that σ1 and
σ2 are finite length continuous representations of M1 and M2 respectively, such
that σ2 (m2 ) ∼
              = σ1 (w−1 m2 w) for all m2 ∈ M2 . Then we say that σ1 and σ2 are
associate representations. For a continuous representation (π, H) of G of finite
length, consider a sequence of subrepresentations

                          {0} = H0 ⊆ H1 ⊆ · · · ⊆ Hk = H

of H where the quotient representations on Hi /Hi−1 are irreducible representations
of G, for i = 1, 2, . . . , k. Denote by R(G) a free Z-module which has for a basis
 e We shall denote by J.H.(π) the formal sum of all classes in G
G.                                                                       e of the repre-
sentations Hi /Hi−1 , i = 1, 2, . . . , k. We shall consider J.H.(π) ∈ R(G) and call
it the Jordan-Hölder series of π. The element J.H.(π) ∈ R(G) does not depend
on the filtration Hi , i = 0, 1, 2, . . . , k as above (one can see that from the linear
independence of characters of representations in G).     e Suppose that P1 = M1 N1
and P2 = M2 N2 are associate parabolic subgroups. Let σ1 and σ2 be associate
representations of M1 and M2 (as before, we consider σ1 and σ2 as representa-
tions of P1 and P2 respectively). A standard fact about parabolic induction from
associate parabolic subgroups by associate representations is that representations
IndG                G
    P1 (σ1 ) and IndP2 (σ2 ) have the same characters, which implies that these two
representations have the same Jordan-Hölder series. The formula for the character
of a parabolically induced representation from a minimal parabolic subgroup, when
F = R, is computed in [Wr, Theorem 5.5.3.1]. A similar formula holds without
assumption on parabolic subgroup. In the nonarchimedean case we have a similar
situation.
   Suppose that τ1 and τ2 are continuous representations of finite length of GL(n, F )
and GL(m, F ) respectively. The above fact about induction from associated para-
bolic subgroups by associate representations implies that τ1 × τ2 and τ2 × τ1 have
the same Jordan-Hölder
               S              series.
   Set Irru = n≥0 GL(n, F )ˆ. To solve the unitarizability problem for the GL(n, F )-
groups, one needs to determine Irru .
   In the rest of this section we shall assume F = C. Recall that | |C is the square
of the standard absolute value that we usually consider on C.
                                                      −1/2
   Let χ0 : C× → C× be the character x 7→ x|x|C . Since each π ∈ GL(n, C)ˆ has
a central character and GL(n, C) is a product of the center and of SL(n, C), the
24                                            Marko Tadić


restriction of representations from GL(n, C) to SL(n, C) gives a one-to-one mapping
of
                    GL(n, C)ˆχ0 ∪ GL(n, C)ˆχ20 ∪ · · · ∪ GL(n, C)ˆχn0
onto SL(n, C)ˆ. Therefore, in order to understand SL(n, C)ˆ it is enough to under-
stand GL(n, C)ˆ (and conversely). In the rest of this paper we shall deal only with
GL-groups and interpret the Gelfand, Naimark, and Stein representations in terms
of GL(n).
   The first obvious irreducible unitary representations of GL(n, C)ˆ are one-dimensional
representations χ ◦ detn where χ is a unitary character of C× and where detn de-
notes the determinant homomorphism of GL(n). Gelfand and Naimark obtained
also the following series of irreducible unitary representations
     (ν −α χ) × (ν α χ) = [ν −α (χ ◦ det)] × [ν α (χ ◦ det)],             χ ∈ (C× )ˆ, 0 < α < 21 ,
                                      1                        1
the complementary series representations for GL(2, C). These complementary series
start from representations
                       χ × χ = (χ ◦ det) × (χ ◦ det),                  χ ∈ (C× )ˆ.
                                       1                   1
The following unitary representations of GL(n, C) will be obtained by parabolic
induction using the above representations. Gelfand and Naimark showed in [GfN2]
that the unitary representations obtained by parabolic induction using the rep-
resentations above are irreducible. They assumed that in this way one gets all
irreducible unitary representations of GL(n, C), up to unitary equivalence.
   We can interpret the above remarks in the following way. Set
     B0 = {χ ◦ det, [ν −α (χ ◦ det)] × [ν α (χ ◦ det)]; χ ∈ (C× )ˆ, n ∈ N, 0 < α < 12 }.
                 n                1                    1
Gelfand and Naimark showed that for τ1 , . . . , τk ∈ B0 , the representations τ1 ×· · ·×
τk are in Irru . Their assumption was that in this way one can get any representation
from Irru .
   Stein showed that the Gelfand and Naimark complementary series representa-
tions for GL(2, C) are just the first of the complementary series representations
which exist for all GL(2n, C) [St]. He showed that
                            [ν −α (χ ◦ det)] × [ν α (χ ◦ det)] ∈ Irru
                                          n                        n
also for n ≥ 2, 0 < α < 1/2, χ ∈ (C× )ˆ, and he showed that these representations
were not obtained by Gelfand and Naimark. These complementary series start from
representations
                       (χ ◦ det) × (χ ◦ det),              n ≥ 2, χ ∈ (C× )ˆ,
                              n               n
which were already well known to Gelfand and Naimark.
   Now it is natural to complete the Gelfand and Naimark list by the Stein com-
plementary series representations. Therefore, put
     B = {χ ◦ det, [ν −α (χ ◦ det)] × [ν α (χ ◦ det)]; χ ∈ (C× )ˆ, n ∈ N, 0 < α < 12 }
                 n                n                   n
(i.e., B is just B0 completed by the Stein complementary series representations).
Now using arguments similar to those of Gelfand and Naimark, one may conclude
that for τ1 , . . . , τk ∈ B the representations τ1 × · · · × τk are in Irru (see [Sh]). Let
us denote by {G.N.S.} the set of all representations obtainable in this way.
    We can explain now in what sense {G.N.S.} is big in Irru . It is easy to prove the
following fact (and we shall prove it later):
                         An external approach to unitary representations               25

(D) For any π ∈ Irru , there exist τ1 , τ2 ∈ {G.N.S.} such that π × τ1 and τ2 have
a composition factor in common.
   It is clear that (D) plays a role in the completeness argument.
   Regarding unitary parabolic induction for GL(n, C), the simplest situation would
be if it were always irreducible. This is what Gelfand and Naimark expected to
hold in 1950:
(S1) Unitary parabolic induction for GL(n, C) is irreducible, i.e.,

                        τ1 , τ2 ∈ Irru       implies   τ1 × τ2 ∈ Irru .

   Let us suppose that (S1) holds. Because of (S1) and (D), for each π ∈ Irru there
exist τ1 , τ2 ∈ {G.N.S.} such that π × τ1 = τ2 . Thus, to obtain Irru , it is enough to
know how representations from {G.N.S.} can be parabolically induced.
   We shall call π ∈ G  b primitive if there is no proper parabolic subgroup P = M N
and σ ∈ M so that π ∼
           c              = IndG                             b
                               P (σ). Certainly, each π ∈ G is unitarily equivalent to
some IndG                    c
           P (σ) where σ ∈ M is primitive. We have mentioned that if P1 and P2 are
associate parabolic subgroups and σ1 , σ2 associate representations, then IndG    P1 (σ1 )
and IndG  P2 (σ2 ) have the same  Jordan-Hölder   series. The simplest situation would
be if the converse were true for σ1 and σ2 primitive (because of the induction in
stages, it is necessary to assume that σ1 and σ2 are primitive). For GL(n, C) this
would mean (having (S1) in mind):
(S2) If both families τi ∈ GL(ni , C)ˆ, i = 1, . . . , n, and σj ∈ GL(mj , C)ˆ, j =
1, . . . , m, consist of primitive representations, and if

                              τ1 × · · · × τn = σ1 × · · · × σm ,

then m = n, and after a renumeration, the sequences (τ1 , . . . , τn ) and (σ1 , . . .
. . . , σm ) are equal (all ni , mj are assumed to be ≥ 1).
   We shall assume that this holds.
   A very plausible hypothesis is:
(S3) The Stein representations

                                                                                1
         [ν −α (χ ◦ det)] × [ν α (χ ◦ det)];       χ ∈ (C× )ˆ, n ∈ N, 0 < α <     ,
                    n                    n                                      2
are primitive.
  Certainly, if we assume (S3), then all elements of B are primitive. Now it is
obvious that (D), together with (S1), (S2), and (S3), implies

                                         Irru = {G.N.S.}.

   It remains to find a way to prove (S1), (S2), and (S3). Note that until now only
(classes of) unitary representations were necessary, and statements (S1), (S2), and
(S3) are essentially analytic. So, if one could prove (D), (S1), (S2), and (S3) dealing
only with unitary representations, one would have a classification of GL(n, C)ˆ
completely in terms of unitary representations.
26                                               Marko Tadić


   As we shall see, (D) is easy to prove using noncomplicated parts of the nonunitary
theory. The following strategy for proving (S2) and (S3) simultaneously can be
used. The set Irru can be embedded in a suitable ring which is factorial and
where multiplication corresponds to parabolic induction. Then one can prove that
elements of B are prime or close to being prime. This would imply (S2) and (S3).
This strategy would also include nonunitary theory (but again, not the complicated
parts).
   Finally, we leave the discussion about (S1) for §9. Let us say that the first ideas
for proving (S1) are due to Gelfand, Naimark, and Kirillov.
   In the following sections we shall elaborate in more detail the above strategy and
outline such a strategy for GL(n) over general local field F .

                         6. The nonunitary dual of GL(n, F )
     In this section, we state some basic facts about a parametrization of GL(n, F )∼ .
     Besides Irru which was introduced in the previous section, we introduce
                                                  [
                                        Irr =          GL(n, F )∼ .
                                                 n≥0


The set of all classes of square integrable representations in Irru of all GL(n, F ), n ≥
1, will be denoted by Du . The set of all essentially square integrable representations
will be denoted by D. More precisely,

                       D = {(χ ◦ det) δ; χ ∈ GL(1, F )∼ , δ ∈ Du }.

For a set X, M (X) will denote the set of all finite multisets in X. These are all
unordered n-tuples, n ∈ Z+ . This is an additive semigroup for the operation

                 (a1 , . . . , an ) + (b1 , . . . , bm ) = (a1 , . . . , an , b1 , . . . , bm ).

   By WF we shall denote the Weil group of F if F is archimedean and the Weil-
Deligne group in the nonarchimedean case. For the purposes of this paper, it
will not be essential to know exactly the definition of WF . We denote by I the
set of all classes of irreducible finite-dimensional representations of WF . By the
local Langlands conjecture for GL(n) (which generalizes local class field theory),
there should exist a natural one-to-one mapping of Irr onto classes of semisimple
representations of WF , i.e., onto M (I)

                                               Irr → M (I).

Under such a mapping, D should correspond to I. Thus, there should exist a
parametrization of Irr by M (D). Let us write one such parametrization.
  Let a = (δ1 , . . . , δn ) ∈ M (D). We can write

                           δi = ν e(δi ) δiu ,         e(δi ) ∈ R, δiu ∈ Du .

After a renumeration, we may assume e(δ1 ) ≥ e(δ2 ) ≥ · · · ≥ e(δn ). The represen-
tation
                             λ(a) = δ1 × · · · × δn
              AN EXTERNAL APPROACH TO UNITARY REPRESENTATIONS                          27

has a unique irreducible quotient (possibly λ(a) itself), whose class depends only
on a [BlWh, Jc1]. Its multiplicity in λ(a) is 1. We shall denote this class by L(a).
Now
                           a 7→ L(a),       M (D) → Irr
is a one-to-one mapping onto Irr. It is a version of the Langlands parametrization
of the nonunitary duals of GL(n)-groups. Certainly, for the existence of such a
parametrization, it is crucial that the parabolic induction by square integrable
representations is irreducible for GL(n).
   The formula for the hermitian contragradient in the Langlands classification
becomes
                        L((δ1 , . . . , δn ))+ = L((δ1+ , . . . , δn+ )).
If we write δi = ν e(δi ) δiu (e(δi ) ∈ R, δiu ∈ Du ), then
                                 δi+ = (ν e(δi ) δiu )+ = ν −e(δi ) δiu .
Also, it is easy to show that
                 ν α L((δ1 , . . . , δn )) = L((ν α δ1 , . . . , ν α δn )),   α ∈ C.
   Let Rn be the free abelian group with basis GL(n, F )∼ , i.e., Rn = R(GL(n, F )).
For each finite-length continuous representation π of GL(n, F ), we have denoted by
J.H.(π) its Jordan-Hölder series which is an element of Rn . Set
                                         M
                                    R=       Rn .
                                                    n≥0

Now R is a graded additive group which is free over Irr. Let
                                        Rn × Rm → Rn+m
be the Z-bilinear mapping defined on the basis Irr by
                                       (σ, τ ) 7→ J.H.(σ × τ ).
This defines a multiplication on R, which will be denoted again by ×. We have
mentioned in the previous section that τ × σ and σ × τ have the same Jordan-
Hölder sequences. This just means the commutativity of R. Since (τ1 × τ2 ) × τ3 ∼=
τ1 × (τ2 × τ3 ) (§5), R is also associative. Certainly, {L(a); a ∈ M (D)} is a
basis of R. It is a standard fact that {λ(a); a ∈ M (D)} is a basis of R (i.e.,
standard characters form a basis of the group of all virtual characters). This means
nothing else than the following fact which was first noticed by Zelevinsky in the
nonarchimedean case [Ze, Corollary 7.5].
6.1. Proposition. The ring R is a Z-polynomial algebra over all essentially square
integrable representations (i.e., over D).
   In particular, R is a factorial ring.
   It is a natural question to ask if it is possible to relate the operation of summing
representations of WF with some operation on representations from Irr in the cor-
respondence a 7→ L(a); i.e., is there a relation between L(a + b) and representations
L(a), L(b)? The answer is very nice:L(a + b) is always a subquotient of L(a) × L(b).
   One may find more information about the Langlands classification on the level of
general reductive groups in [BlWh]. For the Langlands philosophy one may consult
[Gb3].
28                                     MARKO TADIĆ


                             7. Heuristic construction

   In this section we shall try to see what would be the part of the unitary dual for
the GL(n)-groups over arbitrary local field F , generated by classical constructions
(a)–(d) of §3. Our principle will be to expect a situation as simple as we could
assume, bearing our evidence in mind.
   So, let us start with Du . The representation δ × δ is irreducible, so δ × δ ∈ Irru
by the construction (a). Then we have the complementary series which starts from
δ × δ:
                          [ν α δ] × [ν −α δ], 0 < α < 1/2.
This is an example of construction (b). We require α < 1/2 to ensure that the
induced representation is irreducible. At the end of complementary series [ν α δ] ×
[ν −α δ], there will be unitary irreducible subquotients. To be able to identify at
least one, let us recall the relation mentioned at the end of §6; namely,

             L(a + b) is a subquotient of L(a) × L(b) for a, b ∈ M (D) .

We shall assume that this holds in the rest of this section. Therefore, we have
that L((ν 1/2 δ, ν −1/2 δ)) is unitary since it is at the end of the above complementary
series (construction (c)).
   To proceed further, in order to be able to form a new complementary series, let
us suppose that for general linear groups unitary parabolic induction is irreducible.
Then one has L((ν 1/2 δ, ν −1/2 δ)) × L((ν 1/2 δ, ν −1/2 δ)) ∈ Irru , and further, one has
a new complementary series

          [ν α L((ν 1/2 δ, ν −1/2 δ))] × [ν −α L((ν 1/2 δ, ν −1/2 δ))], 0 < α < 1/2.

At the end of this complementary series

                 [ν 1/2 L((ν 1/2 δ, ν −1/2 δ))] × [ν −1/2 L((ν 1/2 δ, ν −1/2 δ))]
                       = L((νδ, δ)) × L((δ, ν −1 δ))

is the unitary subquotient
                                      L((νδ, δ, ν −1 δ, δ))
by the assumption that L(a + b) is a subquotient of L(a) × L(b). It is natural to
ask if the above representation is primitive. But L((νδ, δ, ν −1 δ, δ)) is a subquotient
of
                              L((νδ, δ, ν −1 δ)) × L((δ)).
Note that L((νδ, δ, ν −1 δ)) ⊗ L((δ)) is hermitian. If we take the simplest possibility,
that is, L((νδ, δ, ν −1 δ)) × L((δ)) irreducible, then the construction (d) implies that

                                 L((νδ, δ, ν −1 δ)) ⊗ L((δ))

is unitary. Clearly then, L((νδ, δ, ν −1 δ)) ∈ Irru .
   At this point it is convenient to introduce some notation. Set

                  a(γ, n) = (ν (n−1)/2 γ, ν (n−3)/2 γ, . . . , ν −(n−1)/2 γ)
              AN EXTERNAL APPROACH TO UNITARY REPRESENTATIONS                           29

for γ ∈ D and n ∈ Z+ and

                                     u(γ, n) = L(a(γ, n)).

We shall write
                           ν α (δ1 , . . . , δn ) = (ν α δ1 , . . . , ν α δn ).
  Now we proceed further. We already have u(δ, 1), u(δ, 2), u(δ, 3) ∈ Irru . One
considers a complementary series

                        [ν α u(δ, 3)] × [ν −α u(δ, 3)], 0 < α < 1/2,

which starts from u(δ, 3) × u(δ, 3). At the end we have the representation

                             L(ν 1/2 a(δ, 3)) × L(ν −1/2 a(δ, 3)),

and we can identify one irreducible subquotient which is

                               L(ν 1/2 a(δ, 3) + ν −1/2 a(δ, 3)).

It is a unitary subquotient by (c). Note that

                      ν 1/2 a(δ, 3) + ν −1/2 a(δ, 3) = a(δ, 4) + a(δ, 2)

which means that L(a(δ, 4) + a(δ, 2)) is unitary. Further, this representation is a
subquotient of
                  u(δ, 4) × u(δ, 2) = L(a(δ, 4)) × L(a(δ, 2)).
Suppose again that u(δ, 4)× u(δ, 2) is irreducible. Since it is unitary, u(δ, 4)⊗ u(δ, 2)
needs to be unitary by the construction (d). Therefore, u(δ, 4) will be unitary.
  Now it is easy to conclude that the assumption

                                  u(δ, n) × u(δ, n − 2) ∈ Irr

leads to
                                          u(δ, n) ∈ Irru .
   In the case of GL(n, C), Du is equal to GL(1, C)ˆ = (C× )ˆ. Then u(δ, n) =
δ ◦ detn . So, we have not obtained new unitary representations in this case.

                        8. Scheme of unitarity for GL(n)

   In the last section we have seen heuristically what some simple assumptions sug-
gest. Now we shall write down some of those assumptions and their “implications”.
We first recall that

           u(δ, n) = L(a(δ, n)) = L((ν (n−1)/2 δ, ν (n−3)/2 δ, . . . , ν −(n−1)/2 δ))

for δ ∈ D and n ≥ 1. It was also observed in §6 that R is a factorial ring.
   We introduce the following statements:
  (U0) τ, σ ∈ Irru ⇒ τ × σ ∈ Irr.
  (U1) δ ∈ Du , n ∈ N ⇒ u(δ, n) ∈ Irru .
  (U2) δ ∈ Du , n ∈ N, 0 < α < 1/2 ⇒ [ν α u(δ, n)] × [ν −α u(δ, n)] ∈ Irru .
  (U3) δ ∈ D, n ∈ N ⇒ u(δ, n) is a prime element of R.
  (U4) a, b ∈ M (D) ⇒ L(a + b) is a composition factor of L(a) × L(b).
30                                                MARKO TADIĆ


   Here only (U3) was not assumed or obtained in the last section. It is a strength-
ening of the assumption that the u(δ, n)’s are primitive, which was present in the
last section (otherwise, we would have tried to construct new unitary representa-
tions in that way).
   We have seen that (U0) and (U4) lead to (U1) and (U2) (i.e., unitarity of the
representations mentioned there). But it is interesting and surprising that with
the addition of only one assumption, namely, (U3), the preceding assumptions also
easily imply completeness for the unitary duals of the groups GL(n, F ).
8.1. Proposition. Suppose that (U0)–(U4) hold true. Set

        B = {u(δ, n), [ν α u(δ, n)] × [ν −α u(δ, n)], δ ∈ Du , n ∈ N, 0 < α < 12 }.

Then:
      (i) if τ1 , . . . , τk ∈ B, we have τ1 × · · · × τk ∈ Irru ;
     (ii) if π ∈ Irru , then there exist σ1 , . . . , σm ∈ B such that

                                               π = σ1 × · · · × σm ;

     (iii) if σ1 , . . . , σk , τ1 , . . . , τm ∈ B and σ1 × · · · × σk = τ1 × · · · × τm , then k = m
           and the sequences σ1 , . . . , σk and τ1 , . . . , τm coincide after a renumeration.

  From (U0), (U1), and (U2) one obtains (i) directly. Also (U3) implies (iii). It
remains to prove only (ii). First we shall prove
8.2. Lemma. Suppose that π ∈ Irr is hermitian. If (U4) holds, then there exist
σ1 , . . . , σn , τ1 , . . . , τm ∈ B such that π × σ1 × · · · × σn and τ1 × · · · × τm have a
composition factor in common.
Proof. Let δ ∈ Du , k ∈ (1/2) Z+ , and 0 < β < 1/2. Then

                    (ν −k δ, ν k δ) + a(δ, 2k − 1) = a(δ, 2k + 1),                            k > 0,

and

                     (ν −k−β δ, ν k+β δ) + ν β−1/2 a(δ, 2k) + ν 1/2−β a(δ, 2k)
                               = ν β a(δ, 2k + 1) + ν −β a(δ, 2k + 1).

     Let π ∈ Irr be hermitian. Then π = L((γ1 , . . . , γs )) for some γi ∈ D. Now

                                    L((γ1 , . . . , γs ))+ = L((γ1+ , . . . , γs+ ))

(see §6). This implies that we can write π in the form

                   n1                                n2                                               n3
                                                                                                               !
                   X                                 X                                                X
                              −ki        ki                     −ki −βi            ki +βi
         π=L             (ν         δi , ν δi ) +          (ν             δi , ν            δi ) +         (δi )
                   i=1                              i=n1 +1                                          i=n2 +1


where δi ∈ Du , ki ∈ (1/2) Z+ , 0 < βi < 1/2 and all k1 , . . . , kn1 > 0. Here
n1 , n2 , n3 ∈ Z+ and n2 ≥ n1 , n3 ≥ n2 (i.e., not all three sums need to show up
                  AN EXTERNAL APPROACH TO UNITARY REPRESENTATIONS                                                     31

in the above formula). The two relations at the beginning of the proof and (U4)
imply that both
            "n                         #        "   n2
                                                                                                                  #
             Y1                                     Y
                                                              βi −1/2                      1/2−βi
       π×          u(δi , 2ki − 1) ×                     (ν             u(δi , 2ki ) × ν            u(δi , 2ki ))
             i=1                                i=n1 +1


and
       "n                          #        "   n2
                                                                                                              #
        Y1                                      Y
                                                         βi                         −βi
                 u(δi , 2ki + 1) ×                    (ν u(δi , 2ki + 1) × ν               u(δi , 2ki + 1))
           i=1                              i=n1 +1
                                            "   n3
                                                                 #
                                                Y
                                       ×              u(δi , 1)
                                            i=n2 +1


have
            n1
            X
       L          a (δi , 2ki + 1)
            i=1
                          n2                                                                        n3
                                                                                                               !
                          X                                                                         X
                                       βi                         −βi
                     +         (ν a(δi , 2ki + 1) + ν                    a(δi , 2ki + 1)) +               (δi )
                         i=n1 +1                                                               i=n2 +1


as a composition factor. This completes the proof of the lemma. 
End of proof of Proposition 8.1. Let π ∈ Irru . Then, by the preceding lemma there
exist σi , τj ∈ B so that π × σ1 × · · · × σn and τ1 × · · · × τm have a composition factor
in common. Since (U0), (U1), and (U2) imply that both sides are irreducible, we
have
                           π × σ1 × · · · × σn = τ1 × · · · × τm .
Since R is factorial and the u(δ, n)’s are prime by (U3), π is a product of some
u(δ, k)’s, δ ∈ D. But the fact that π is hermitian implies that π is actually a
product of elements of B. So, we have proved (ii). 
8.3. Remark. For GL(n) over a central simple division F -algebra, we expect that
a scheme of this type should work too. In that case a slight modification in the
definitions of the u(δ, n)’s and lengths of complementary series is necessary (see
[Td7]).

                                                    9. On proofs

   We have seen that the fulfillment of (U0)–(U4) implies a complete solution of
the unitarizability problem for GL(n, F ), as was described in Proposition 8.1.
   Let us remark that (U0)–(U4) were expected to hold for F = C (except maybe
(U3) because such questions were not considered). Statements (U1) and (U2) were
known, (U0) was expected even by Gelfand and Naimark, while (U4) is easy to
prove. A simple consequence of (U0)–(U4), namely, the description of the unitary
dual of GL(n, C), was not generally expected to hold. Now we shall make a few
remarks on the history and proofs of (U0)–(U4).
32                                   MARKO TADIĆ


   We start with the statement (U4), which belongs to the theory of the nonunitary
dual. This fact was proved by Zelevinsky in the case of nonarchimedean F for his
classification of GL(n, F ). His proof uses induction on Gelfand-Kazhdan derivatives
[Ze, Proposition 8.4]. Rodier noticed in [Ro] that Zelevinsky’s proof implies (U4)
for the Langlands classification in the nonarchimedean case. We proved (U4) in a
simple manner for the archimedean case [Td2, Proposition 3.5. and 5.6]. Such a
proof is outlined for nonarchimedean F in Remark A.12(iii) of [Td3]. Sometimes
one can conclude the equality in (U4), using the Zelevinsky’s proof of Proposition
8.5 in [Ze].
9.1. Proposition. Let ai = (δ1i , . . . , δni i ) ∈ M (D), i = 1, 2. If δk1 × δm
                                                                               2
                                                                                 ∈ Irr for
all 1 ≤ k ≤ n1 and 1 ≤ m ≤ n2 , then

                             L(a1 ) × L(a2 ) = L(a1 + a2 ).

   The above proposition may be helpful in constructing complementary series.
   Let us now consider (U1). Certainly if F = C, then there is nothing to prove
since as we already mentioned, Du = (C× )ˆ and for χ ∈ Du , u(χ, n) = χ ◦ detn .
   For F = R, Du ⊆ GL(1, R)ˆ ∪ GL(2, R)ˆ. Again, (U1) is evident if χ ∈ (R× )ˆ.
Speh considered the remaining case of u(δ, n), δ ∈ GL(2, R)ˆ ∩ Du [Sp2]. She
proved unitarity using adelic methods. Surprisingly, it seems that Gelfand and
Graev were already aware of this series of representations in the 1950s (see [Sp2,
Remark 1.2.2.] about [GfGr]).
   For nonarchimedean F , we have determined in [Td3] the representations u(δ, n)
through the ideas presented in §7. Unitarizability is proved there essentially along
those lines. It is also possible to prove unitarizability by the method of Speh as was
done in the appendix of [Td3]. Note that here Du ∩ GL(n, F )ˆ 6= ∅ for all n ≥ 1.
   For F = C, (U2) was proved by Stein in [St]. In general, (U2) follows from (U0),
using the irreducibility of representations ν α u(δ, n) × ν −α u(δ, n), 0 < α < 1/2,
obtained from Proposition 9.1 and from the analytic properties of intertwining
operators. There is also another method in the nonarchimedean case presented in
[Bn2].
   To prove (U3), one considers the u(δ, n)’s as polynomials and proves the irre-
ducibility of these polynomials. Here one uses the fact that R is a graded ring and
that u(δ, n)’s are homogeneous elements. In the proof, one uses basic facts about
the composition series of generalized principal series representations (one does not
need more detailed information, such as that obtained from Kazhdan-Lusztig type
multiplicity formulas). It is a bit surprising that, although we do not know how to
write down the polynomials u(δ, n), we can nevertheless carry out the proof. For
proofs of (U3) see [Td3] and [Td2]. The statement (U3) is obvious for u(δ, 1) by
Proposition 6.1.
   Finally, let us return to (U0). Let Pn denote the subgroup of GL(n, F ) of all
matrices with bottom row equal to (0, . . . , 0, 1). Already Gelfand and Naimark
noticed the importance of the statement
     (I) If π ∈ GL(n, F )ˆ, then π|Pn is irreducible (n ∈ N).
   Actually, they proved the above statement for F = C, for the representations
that they expected to exhaust the unitary dual of GL(n, C). Several people were
aware that the above statement implies (U0). For a written proof see [Sh]. Proof
of the implication is based on Mackey theory and Gelfand-Naimark models.
             AN EXTERNAL APPROACH TO UNITARY REPRESENTATIONS                        33

   Kirillov stated (I) as a theorem in [Ki1] for F an archimedean field. There he
sketched a proof. Vahutinskii’s classification of representations of GL(3, R)ˆ was
based on the proof. Having in mind a correspondence obtained by Mackey theory

                     Pbn → GL(n − 1, F )ˆ ∪ GL(n − 2, F )ˆ ∪ · · ·
                          ∪ GL(2, F )ˆ ∪ GL(1, F )ˆ ∪ GL(0, F )ˆ,

the statement (I) would imply that one would have simpler realizations for rep-
resentations from GL(n, F )ˆ. It is from this setup that the name Kirillov model
appears. In [Ki1] Kirillov’s intention was to prove that π|Pn is operator irreducible
(i.e., the commutator consists only of scalars), which is enough by Schur’s lemma
to see the irreducibility of π|Pn . One takes any T from the commutator of π|Pn
and considers a distribution

                              ΛT : ϕ 7→ Trace (T π(ϕ))

on GL(n, F ) which is invariant for conjugations with elements from Pn , since T
is Pn -intertwining. Now if ΛT is GL(n, F )-invariant, then using the irreducibil-
ity of π, it is not difficult to obtain that T must be a scalar. Kirillov indicated
that he proved in [Ki1] that ΛT is GL(n, F )-invariant (however, see below). This
property of the distribution is especially easy to see when π is a continuous finite-
dimensional representation. Then the distribution ΛT is given by a continuous
function which must be constant on Pn -conjugacy classes (ΛT is Pn -invariant).
Since in GL(n, F ), GL(n, F )-conjugacy classes contain dense Pn -conjugacy classes,
ΛT must be GL(n, F )-invariant.
   Bernstein proved in [Bn2] that for F nonarchimedean, each Pn -invariant distri-
bution is GL(n, F )-invariant. He proved (I) using essentially the Kirillov’s strategy.
Besides proving (U0) in the nonarchimedean case, he gave a different proof of the
implication (I) ⇒ (U0).
   Bernstein states in [Bn2] that Kirillov’s proof of (I) for F archimedean in [Ki1] is
incorrect, and he wrote that he himself had an almost complete proof (see [Bn2, p.
55]). In any case, there is no written complete proof of (I) in the archimedean case
now. We would say that Kirillov’s proof is incomplete rather than incorrect. He
failed to give a complete argument that the distribution ΛT is GL(n, F )-invariant.
As was noted by Bernstein, the tools used in Kirillov’s paper do not seem to be
sufficient for proving (I). The distribution ΛT is a very special one. Actually (I)
would imply that it is a multiple of an irreducible character; so by Harish-Chandra’s
regularity theorem, it is locally L1 and analytic on regular semisimple elements.
So if one proves that the (eigen) distribution ΛT is locally L1 and analytic on
regular semisimple elements, one could apply finite-dimensional argument. This
may provide a strategy to prove (I) in the archimedean case. This would be a
longer proof, and there are also some disadvantages in proving (U0) through (I).
We shall say a few words about these disadvantages. Before that, observe that
there is an implicit proof of (U0) in [Vo3].
   We have mentioned that the approach to the unitary dual of GL(n, F ) is ex-
pected to be applicable to GL(n) over a central division F -algebra A. As far as
we understand, Vogan’s description of the unitary dual of GL(n, H) confirms this.
Here (U0) cannot be proved through (I), simply because (I) is false in general in
this case. The simplest example can be obtained for GL(2, A) (A 6= F ). It is not
34                                 MARKO TADIĆ


difficult to see that there exist (irreducible) tempered representations which are
reducible when restricted to a nontrivial parabolic subgroup. Thus, it may be more
reasonable to search for proof of (U0) which works also for division algebras. There
are some candidates for it (see the last remark at the end of this section).
   After all, we have the following:
Theorem. Let F be a locally compact nondiscrete field. Set

     B = {u(δ, n), [ν α u(δ, n)] × [ν −α u(δ, n)], δ ∈ Du , n ∈ N, 0 < α < 21 }.

Then
    (i) if σ1 , . . . , σk ∈ B, then σ1 × · · · × σk ∈ Irru ;
   (ii) if π ∈ Irru , then there exist σ1 , . . . , σm ∈ B, unique up to a permutation,
        such that
                                     π = σ1 × · · · × σm .
   We remind the reader once more that there is no written complete proof yet
of (U0) in the archimedean case, but there is a complete proof [Vo3] of the above
theorem in this case.
Remarks. (1) We give in [Td4] a concrete realization of the topological space
GL(n, F )ˆ when F is nonarchimedean.
    (2) The last theorem, together with [Ka], implies that π ∈ SL(n, C)ˆ is isolated
if and only if π is the trivial representation and n 6= 2.
    (3) Let F be nonarchimedean. Let ρ ∈ Irru be a representation having a non-
trivial compactly supported modulo center matrix coefficient. Then for k ∈ N, the
representation
                          ν (k−1) ρ × ν (k−3) ρ × · · · × ν −(k−1) ρ
has a unique square integrable subquotient which will be denoted by δ(ρ, k). In
this way one obtains all Du (see [Ze] and [Jc1]). In [Td4] we have proved that
π ∈ GL(n, F )ˆ is isolated modulo center if and only if π equals some u(δ(ρ, k), m)
with k 6= 2 and m 6= 2.
    (4) One could try to prove (U0) for GL(n) over local division algebras by proving
first the following conjecture: Let A be a central local simple algebra, let S be the
subgroup of the diagonal matrices in GL(2, A), let N be the subgroup of upper
triangular unipotent elements in GL(2, A), and let σ be an irreducible unitary
                                GL(2,A)
representation of S. Then IndSN         (σ) should be irreducible.
    (5) A proof of (U3) and (U4) for GL(n) over a local nonarchimedean division
algebra is contained in [Td7].

                                    References

   The references that we include here are directed more to an inexperienced reader
in the field of the representation theory than to the experienced one. This is the
reason that we have classified them into several groups (see below). We have tried
to avoid too many very technical references, which are very common in the field.
We include a number of expository and survey papers (they also omit many techni-
calities). A more demanding reader can also find a choice of relevant references for
further reading. We have omitted a number of important references in order not to
confuse a reader who is not very familiar with the field.
                                      AN EXTERNAL APPROACH TO UNITARY REPRESENTATIONS                                        35

     Let us explain our classification of the references into several groups. The clas-
 sification is not very rigid. To each reference we have attached a superscript that
 indicates the group where it belongs. Here is a description of the groups.
   sur denotes the group of survey and expository papers.
  gen denotes the group of general references.
GL (n) denotes the group of papers that are directly related to the topic of our
       paper. They are very useful for the further understanding of the topics
       discussed in our paper. The complete proofs that are omitted in this paper
       can be found in the papers from this group.
   his denotes the group of the historically important references for the topic of
       this paper.
  Lan denotes the group of references directly related to the Langlands program
       and groups GL(n). These references are very often related to the various
       correspondences predicted by the Langlands program for groups GL(n).
       Generally, these references are directed to more demanding and experienced
       readers.
   oth denotes the group of remaining useful references. They are mostly related
       to unitarity.
      sur
 [A         ]    J. Arthur, Automorphic representations and number theory, 1980 Seminar on Har-
                 monic Analysis, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1981, pp. 3–51.
    oth
 [Bb ]           D. Barbasch, The unitary dual for complex classical groups, Invent. Math. 96
                 (1989), 103–176.
    his
 [Bg ]           V. Bargmann, Irreducible unitary representations of the Lorentz group, Ann. of
                 Math. 48 (1947), 568–640.
     oth
 [Bn1 ]          J. Bernstein, All reductive p-adic groups are tame, Funct. Anal. Appl. 8 (1974),
                 91–93.
     GL (n)
 [Bn2       ]           , P-invariant distributions on GL(N ) and the classification of unitary rep-
                 resentations of GL(N ) (nonarchimedean case), Lie Group Representations II, Pro-
                 ceedings, Univ. Maryland 1982–83, Lecture Notes in Math., vol. 1041, Springer-
                 Verlag, Berlin, 1984, pp. 50–102.
        GL (n)
 [BnZe1        ] J. Bernstein and A. V. Zelevinsky, Representations of the group GL(n, F ), where
                 F is a local nonarchimedean field, Uspekhi Mat. Nauk. 31 (1976), 5–70.
                    GL (n)
 [BnZe2                           ]            , Induced representations of reductive p-adic groups. I, Ann. Sci. École
                                      Norm. Sup. (4) 10 (1977), 441–472.
      gen
 [Bl  ]                               A. Borel, Linear algebraic groups, Benjamin, New York, 1969.
      gen
 [BlWh    ]                           A. Borel and N. Wallach, Continuous cohomology, discrete subgroups, and repre-
                                      sentations of reductive groups, Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, NJ, 1980.
        gen
 [Bu1               ]                 N. Bourbaki, Groupes de Lie réels compacts, Groupes et Algèbres de Lie, chapter
                                      9, Masson, Paris, 1982.
        gen
 [Bu2   ]                                      , Mesure de Haar, Intégration, chapter 7, Hermann, Paris, 1963.
    oth
 [Cy ]                                H. Carayol, Représentations cuspidales du groupe linéaire, Ann. Sci. École Norm.
                                      Sup (4) 17 (1984), 191–226.
       sur
 [Ct            ]                     P. Cartier, Representations of p-adic groups; a survey, Proc. Sympos. Pure Math.,
                                      vol. 33, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1979, pp. 111–155.
       gen
 [Cs            ]                     W. Casselman, Introduction to the theory of admissible representations of p-adic
                                      reductive groups, preprint.
             oth
 [CsMi                  ]             W. Casselman and D. Miličić, Asymptotic behavior of matrix coefficients of ad-
                                      missible representations, Duke Math. J. 49 (1982), 869–930.
      sur
 [Cl         ]                        L. Clozel, Progrès récents vers la classification du dual unitaire des groupes réductifs
                                      réels, Séminaire Bourbaki, no. 681 (1987); Astérisque 152–153 (1987), 229–252.
                        Lan
 [DeKaVi                      ]       P. Deligne, D. Kazhdan, and M.-F. Vignéras, Représentations des algèbres cen-
                                      trales simples p-adiques, Représentations des Groupes Réductifs sur un Corps Lo-
36                                                                 MARKO TADIĆ


                                          cal, by J.-N. Bernstein, P. Deligne, D. Kazhdan, and M.-F. Vignéras, Hermann,
                                          Paris, 1984.
      gen
[Di         ]                             J. Dixmier, Les C ∗ -algebras et leurs représentations, Gauthiers-Villars, Paris,
                                          1969.
       sur
[Du1                ]                     M. Duflo, Représentations de carré intégrable des groupes semi-simples réels,
                                          Séminaire Bourbaki, no. 508 (1977-1978), Lecture Notes in Math., vol. 710, Springer-
                                          Verlag, Berlin, 1979.
       oth
[Du2                ]                            , Théorie de Mackey pour les groupes algèbriques, Acta Math. 149 (1982),
                                          153–213.
     oth
[Fe  ]                                    J. M. G. Fell, Nonunitary dual space of groups, Acta Math. 114 (1965), 267–310.
    sur
[Gb1 ]                                    S. Gelbart, Automorphic forms on adele groups, Ann. of Math. Stud., vol. 83,
                                          Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, NJ, 1975.
       sur
[Gb2                ]                            , Elliptic curves and automorphic representations, Adv. in Math. 21 (1976),
                                          235–292.
       sur
[Gb3                ]                            , An elementary introduction to the Langlands program, Bull. Amer. Math.
                                          Soc. 10 (1984), 177–219.
        his
[GfGr                   ]                 I. M. Gelfand and M. I. Graev, Unitary representations of the real unimodular
                                          group, Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR Ser. Mat. 17 (1953), 189–248.
                    gen
[GfGrPi                             ]     I. M. Gelfand, M. Graev, and Piatetski-Shapiro, Representation theory and auto-
                                          morphic functions, Saunders, Philadelphia, PA, 1969.
            GL (n)
[GfKa                                   ] I. M. Gelfand and D. A. Kazhdan, Representations of GL(n, k), Lie Groups and
                                          Their Representations, Halstead Press, Budapest, 1974, pp. 95–118.
           his
[GfN1                   ]                 I. M. Gelfand and M. A. Naimark, Unitary representations of the Lorentz group,
                                          Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR Ser. Mat. 11 (1947), 411–504. (Russian)
           his
[GfN2                   ]                        , Unitäre Darstellungen der Klassischen Gruppen (German translation of
                                          Russian publication from 1950), Akademie Verlag, Berlin, 1957.
           his
[GfRa                   ]                 I. M. Gelfand and D. A. Raikov, Irreducible unitary representations of locally
                                          compact groups, Mat. Sb. 13 (55) (1943), 301–316.
       sur
[Ha1                ]                     Harish-Chandra, Harmonic analysis on semisimple Lie groups, Bull. Amer. Math.
                                          Soc. 76 (1970), 529–551.
       sur
[Ha2                ]                             , Harmonic analysis on reductive p-adic groups, Proc. Sympos. Pure Math.,
                                          vol. 26, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1973, pp. 167–192.
       gen
[Ha3                ]                             , Collected papers, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1983.
      Lan
[He             ]                         G. Henniart, On the local Langlands conjecture for GL(n): the cyclic case, Ann.
                                          of Math. (2) 123 (1986), 145–203.
      oth
[Ho         ]                             R. Howe, Tamely ramified supercuspidal representations of GLn , Pacific J. Math.
                                          73 (1977), 437–460.
            oth
[HoMr                       ]             R. Howe and C. C. Moore, Asymptotic properties of unitary representations, J.
                                          Funct. Anal. 32 (1979), 72–96.
      GL (n)
[Jc1                            ]         H. Jacquet, Generic representations, Non-Commutative Harmonic Analysis, Lec-
                                          ture Notes in Math., vol. 587, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1977, pp. 91–101.
      GL (n)
[Jc2                            ]                , On the residual spectrum of GL(n), Lie Group Representations II, Pro-
                                          ceedings, Univ. of Maryland 1982–83, Lecture Notes in Math., vol. 1041, Springer-
                                          Verlag, Berlin, 1984, pp. 185–208.
       Lan
[JcL                ]                     H. Jacquet and R. P. Langlands, Automorphic forms on GL(2), Lecture Notes in
                                          Math., vol. 114, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1970.
      oth
[Jn         ]                             C. Jantzen, Degenerate principal series for symplectic groups, Mem. Amer. Math.
                                          Society, no. 488, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1993.
      oth
[Ka         ]                             D. A. Kazhdan, Connection of the dual space of a group with the structure of its
                                          closed subgroups, Funct. Anal. Appl. 1 (1967), 63–65.
       GL (n)
[Ki1                            ]         A. A. Kirillov, Infinite dimensional representations of the general linear group,
                                          Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR 114 (1962), 37–39.
       gen
[Ki2            ]                                , Elements of the theory of representations, Springer-Verlag, New York,
                                          1976.
                                        AN EXTERNAL APPROACH TO UNITARY REPRESENTATIONS                                      37

      gen
[Kn             ]                       A. W. Knapp, Representation theory of semisimple groups, Princeton Univ. Press,
                                        Princeton, NJ, 1986.
            sur
[KnZu                       ]           A. W. Knapp and G. J. Zuckerman, Classification theorems for representations of
                                        semisimple Lie groups, Non-Commutative Harmonic Analysis, Lecture Notes in
                                        Math., vol. 587, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1977, pp. 138–159.
                Lan
[KuMy                           ]       P. Kutzko and A. Moy, On the local Langlands conjecture in prime dimension,
                                        Ann. of Math. (2) 121 (1985), 495–517.
      sur
[L1         ]                           R. P. Langlands, Problems in the theory of automorphic forms, Lecture Notes in
                                        Math., vol. 170, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1970, pp. 18–86.
      gen
[L2          ]                                  , On the classification of irreducible representations of real algebraic groups,
                                        Representation Theory and Harmonic Analysis on Semisimple Lie Groups (P. J.
                                        Sally, Jr., and D. A. Vogan, Jr., eds.), Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1989.
       his
[Ma          ]                          F. Mautner, Spherical functions over p-adic fields. I, Amer. J. Math. 80 (1958),
                                        441–457.
      oth
[Mi          ]                          D. Miličić, On C ∗ -algebras with bounded trace, Glasnik Mat. 8 (1973), 7–21.
                    oth
[MœWd                               ]   C. Mœglin and J.-L. Waldspurger, Le spectre residuel de GL(n), Ann. Sci. École
                                        Norm. Sup. (4) 22 (1989), 605–674.
       Lan
[My              ]                      A. Moy, Local constants and the tame Langlands correspondence, Amer. J. Math.
                                        108 (1986), 863–930.
      sur
[Ro          ]                          F. Rodier, Représentations de GL(n, k) où k est un corps p-adique, Séminaire
                                        Bourbaki, no. 587 (1982), Astérisque 92–93 (1982), 201–218.
      GL (n)
[Sh                         ]           S. Sahi, On Kirillov’s conjecture for archimedean fields, Compositio Math. 72
                                        (1989), 67–86.
        oth
[SlTd                   ]               P. J. Sally and M. Tadić, Induced representations and classifications for GSp(2, F )
                                        and Sp(2, F ), Mém. Soc. Math. France 52 (1993).
       oth
[Sd1                ]                   F. Shahidi, Fourier transforms of intertwining operators and Plancherel measure
                                        for GL(n), Amer. J. Math. 106 (1984), 67–111.
       oth
[Sd2                ]                           , A proof of Langlands conjecture on Plancherel measures; complementary
                                        series for p-adic groups, Ann. of Math. (2) 132 (1990), 273–330.
      oth
[Si1            ]                       A. Silberger, The Langlands quotient theorem for p-adic groups, Math. Ann. 236
                                        (1978), 95–104.
      gen
[Si2            ]                              , Introduction to harmonic analysis on reductive p-adic groups, Princeton
                                        Univ. Press, Princeton, NJ, 1979.
       oth
[Sp1                ]                   B. Speh, The unitary dual of GL(3, R) and GL(4, R), Math. Ann. 258 (1981),
                                        113–133.
       GL (n)
[Sp2                            ]              , Unitary representations of GL(n, R) with nontrivial (g, K)-cohomology,
                                        Invent. Math. 71 (1983), 443–465.
   GL (n)
[St                     ]               E. M. Stein, Analysis in matrix spaces and some new representations of SL(N, C),
                                        Ann. of Math. 86 (1967), 461–490.
       sur
[Td1                ]                   M. Tadić, Unitary dual of p-adic GL(n), proof of Bernstein conjectures, Bull.
                                        Amer. Math. Soc. 13 (1985), 39–42.
       GL (n)
[Td2                                ]            , Unitary representations of general linear group over real and complex
                                        field, preprint MPI/SFB 85-22 Bonn, 1985.
       GL(n)
[Td3                            ]              , Classification of unitary representations in irreducible representations of
                                        general linear group (nonarchimedean case), Ann. Sci. École Norm. Sup. (4) 19
                                        (1986), 335–382.
       oth
[Td4                ]                          , Topology of unitary dual of nonarchimedean GL(n), Duke Math. J. 55
                                        (1987), 385–422.
       oth
[Td5                ]                         , On limits of characters of irreducible unitary representations, Glasnik
                                        Mat. 23 (1988), 15–25.
       oth
[Td6                ]                         , Geometry of dual spaces of reductive groups (nonarchimedean case), J.
                                        Analyse Math. 51 (1988), 139–181.
       oth
[Td7                ]                          , Induced representations of GL(n, A) for p-adic division algebras A, J.
                                        Reine Angew. Math. 405 (1990), 48–77.
38                                                   MARKO TADIĆ

       oth
[Td8            ]                  , On Jacquet modules of induced representations of p-adic symplectic groups,
                            Harmonic Analysis on Reductive Groups, Proceedings, Bowdoin College 1989,
                            Progr. Math., vol. 101, Birkhäuser, Boston, MA, 1991, pp. 305–314.
      gen
[Vo1         ]              D. A. Vogan, Representations of real reductive groups, Birkhäuser, Boston, MA,
                            1981.
      oth
[Vo2         ]                     , Unitarizability of certain series of representations, Ann. of Math. (2) 120
                            (1984), 141–187.
      GL(n)
[Vo3                    ]           , The unitary dual of GL(n) over an archimedean field, Invent. Math. 82
                            (1986), 449–505.
      oth
[Vo4         ]                      , Unitary representations of reductive Lie groups, Princeton Univ. Press,
                            Princeton, NJ, 1987.
      gen
[Wh      ]                  N. Wallach, Real reductive groups, vol. 1, Academic Press, New York, 1988.
    gen
[Wr     ]                   G. Warner, Harmonic analysis on semi-simple Lie groups. I, II, Springer-Verlag,
                            Berlin, 1972.
      gen
[We         ]               A. Weil, Basic number theory, Springer-Verlag, New York, 1974.
     GL(n)
[Ze                 ]       A. V. Zelevinsky, Induced representations of reductive p-adic groups II, On ir-
                            reducible representations of GL(n), Ann. Sci. École Norm. Sup. (4) 13 (1980),
                            165–210.

    Department of Mathematics, University of Zagreb, Bijenička 30, 41000 Zagreb,
Croatia
    Current address: Sonderforschungsbereich 170, Geometrie und Analysis, Mathematisches In-
stitut Bunsenstr. 3-5, D-3400 Göttingen, Germany
    E-mail address: tadic@cfgauss.uni-math.gwdg.de
