                                                   Analogues of Weyl’s Formula for Reduced
arXiv:math/0207195v1 [math.RT] 22 Jul 2002




                                                             Enveloping Algebras
                                                                               J.E. Humphreys
                                              Dept. of Mathematics & Statistics, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003
                                                                       E-mail: jeh@math.umass.edu
                                                                           January 24, 2018


                                                                                 Abstract
                                                      In this note we study simple modules for a reduced enveloping algebra
                                                  Uχ (g) in the critical case when χ ∈ g∗ is “nilpotent”. Some dimension
                                                  formulas computed by Jantzen suggest modified versions of Weyl’s dimen-
                                                  sion formula, based on certain reflecting hyperplanes for the affine Weyl
                                                  group which might be associated to Kazhdan–Lusztig cells.


                                             1    Introduction
                                             In the last decade or so there has been significant progress in understanding
                                             the non-restricted representations of the Lie algebra of a reductive group over
                                             a field of prime characteristic. Friedlander and Parshall extended the earlier
                                             foundations laid by Kac and Weisfeiler, while Premet proved the Kac–Weisfeiler
                                             conjecture on the minimum p-power dividing dimensions. More recently the
                                             work of Jantzen has reinforced ideas of Lusztig which arise in the framework of
                                             affine Hecke algebras and Springer fibers in the flag variety.
                                                 In spite of the progress made, serious obstacles remain to a definitive treat-
                                             ment of the representations. Here we attempt to interpret Jantzen’s explicit
                                             dimension calculations in terms of analogues of Weyl’s classical formula, imitat-
                                             ing Kazhdan–Lusztig theory for the case of restricted representations.


                                             2    Reduced enveloping algebras
                                             First we recall briefly some essential background and notation, referring for
                                             details to the survey [5] and the lectures by Jantzen [8], whose notation we
                                             mainly follow. For Lusztig’s perspective on these questions, see [17].




                                                                                     1
2.1
Let G be a simply connected, semisimple algebraic group over an algebraically
closed field of characteristic p > 0, with Lie algebra g. Following work of
Kac and Weisfeiler, the simple modules for the universal enveloping algebra
U (g) partition into modules for quotients Uχ (g) of U (g) (reduced enveloping
algebras) associated with linear functionals χ ∈ g∗ . All χ in a coadjoint G-orbit
yield isomorphic algebras. If χ = 0, Uχ (g) is the restricted enveloping algebra,
whose representations include those derived from representations of G.
    It has been known since early work of Jacobson and Zassenhaus that the
maximum possible dimension of a simple module for g or U (g) is pN (N =
number of positive roots). The Steinberg module in the restricted case is an
example where this dimension is achieved.

2.2
The “nilpotent” χ (including χ = 0) play the main role. These correspond to
nilpotent elements of g when g can be identified in a G-equivariant way with g∗ ,
and form finitely many G-orbits (corresponding naturally to the characteristic
0 orbits when p is good). Probably the most important question about the
representation theory of Uχ (g) is this:
    Question. How does the geometry of the G-orbit Gχ influence the category
of Uχ (g)-modules?
    The orbit geometry involves a number of important ideas which have played
a major role in characteristic 0 representation theory: Springer’s resolution of
the nilpotent variety, the flag variety and Springer fibers, affine Weyl groups
and Hecke algebras, Kazhdan–Lusztig theory. It seems clear from recent work
of Lusztig that many of these same ideas should recur in prime characteristic.
In particular, the affine Weyl group Wp relative to p (defined in terms of the
Langlands dual of G) has for a long time been known to play a major role in
organizing the representation theory of G.

2.3
The category of Uχ (g)-modules can be enriched by adding a natural action of
the centralizer group CG (χ). When this group contains at least a 1-dimensional
torus T0 , Jantzen is able to obtain graded versions of the Lie algebra actions
and exploit translation functors much as in the restricted case.
    The best-behaved case occurs when χ has standard Levi form in the sense
of Friedlander–Parshall [4]: for some choice of Borel subalgebra b, we have
χ(b) = 0 while χ vanishes on all negative root vectors x−α except for a set I
of simple roots α. (This always happens in type A.) Then the simple Uχ (g)-
modules are parametrized uniformly by linked weights w · λ with w running over
coset representatives for the subgroup WI of the Weyl group W generated by
corresponding reflections.




                                        2
    In general the parametrization by weights is much less well understood.
It may depend in part on the choice of a Borel subalgebra on which χ van-
ishes: such a Borel subalgebra lies on one or more irreducible components of
the Springer fiber. It is also possible that the component group CG (χ)/CG (χ)◦
and its characters will play a significant role, as they do in Springer theory.
Recent work of Brown and Gordon [3] confirms, at any rate, that the blocks
of Uχ (g) (when χ is nilpotent) are in natural bijection with linkage classes of
restricted weights. Here we consider only the most generic situation, involv-
ing simple modules in blocks parametrized by p-regular weights. This requires
p ≥ h (the Coxeter number).

2.4
So far the most striking general fact about Uχ (g)-modules is the theorem of
Premet [20], valid for arbitrary χ (under mild restrictions on g and p):
   If d is half the dimension of the coadjoint orbit Gχ, then the dimension of
every Uχ (g)-module is divisible by pd .
   This had been conjectured much earlier by Kac and Weisfeiler. In particular,
when χ is regular, all simple modules have the maximum possible dimension pN
(N = number of positive roots). Premet’s theorem suggests a natural question:
   With d as above, does there always exist a simple Uχ (g)-module Lχ (λ) of the
smallest possible dimension pd ?
   The answer is yes in the cases investigated so far, but for no obvious concep-
tual reason unless χ lies in a Richardson orbit (permitting an easy construction
by parabolic induction from a trivial module). Our proposed interpretation of
dimension formulas stems partly from trying to understand this question better.


3     The restricted case
We recall briefly the standard framework [6] for the study of simple G-modules,
which include all simple Uχ (g)-modules when χ = 0.
   For each dominant weight λ there is a Weyl module V (λ), whose formal
character and dimension are given by Weyl’s formulas. In particular,
                                     Q              ∨
                                       α>0 hλ + ρ, α i
                          dim V (λ) = Q                .
                                         α>0 hρ, α i
                                                  ∨


Each Weyl module has a unique simple quotient L(λ). Those for which λ is
restricted (the coordinates of λ relative to fundamental weights lying between
0 and p − 1) are precisely the pr simple U0 (g)-modules, where r is the rank.
Knowing just these modules would allow one to recover all L(λ) as twisted
tensor products, by Steinberg’s Tensor Product Theorem [22]. But so far the
broader study of Weyl modules for G has yielded the most concrete results.
    Knowledge of the formal characters and dimensions of all L(λ) is equiva-
lent to knowledge of the composition factor multiplicities of all V (λ). When
p < h (the Coxeter number), there is no specific program for finding these

                                       3
multiplicities, but for p ≥ h the answer is expected to be given by Lusztig’s
conjecture. (This is known to be true for “sufficiently large” p, from the work
of Andersen–Jantzen–Soergel [1].)
    Lusztig’s approach depends on the fact that composition factors of V (λ)
must have highest weights linked to λ under the standard dot action of the
affine Weyl group Wp relative to p. Write dominant weights as w · λ, where λ
lies in the lowest alcove of the dominant Weyl chamber. One can in principle
express the character of L(w · λ) as an alternating sum (with multiplicities) of
the known Weyl characters for various weights w′ · λ ≤ w · λ. The multiplicities
are in turn predicted to be the values of Kazhdan–Lusztig polynomials for pairs
in Wp related to (w′ , w), after evaluation at 1. This procedure is inherently
recursive and even in low ranks cannot usually be expected to produce simple
closed formulas for characters or dimensions of simple modules.
    Note how use of the lowest dominant alcove as a starting point locates in
a natural way the unique weight λ = 0 for which L(λ) has the smallest pos-
sible dimension p0 = 1. This weight is as close as possible to all hyperplanes
bounding the alcove below, i.e., minimizes the numerator of Weyl’s formula.
But cancellation by the denominator is needed to produce 1.


4    Special cases
At the opposite extreme from χ = 0, in the case where the coadjoint orbit of χ
is regular (with d = N ), one has dim Lχ (λ) = pN for all λ. Much less is known
between these extremes.
    In a series of recent papers, Jantzen has studied a number of special cases
when χ is nilpotent and of small codimension in the nilpotent variety. He obtains
explicit dimension formulas for simple modules, as well as many details about
projective modules, Ext groups, etc. Unlike the case χ = 0, it is feasible here
to work out closed formulas for dimensions.

 (a) Type B2 , with χ in the minimal (nonzero) nilpotent orbit was first treated
     by ad hoc methods in [7] and then more systematically in [11]. We take a
     closer look at this in the following section.
 (b) The case when χ lies in the subregular orbit (d = N − 1) was initially
     treated in [9] for the two simple types An , Bn where χ can be chosen in
     standard Levi form. A more comprehensive treatment was then given in
     [10]. The results are more complete for simply-laced types. When there
     are two root lengths, the number of simple modules in a typical block is
     less certain (leading to uncertainty about some of the dimensions), but
     everything is expected to agree with Lusztig’s predictions.
 (c) Unpublished work by Jantzen (assisted by B. Jessen for type G2 ) deals
     with a number of other cases, including the nilpotent orbits of G2 for
     which d = 3, 4 (while N = 6) and the “middle” orbit of A3 (with d =
     4, N = 6). He also works out families of examples involving standard Levi


                                       4
      form: Cn (n ≥ 3) with I of type Cn−1 and Dn (n ≥ 4) with I of type Dn−1 .
      In each case d = N − 2. The results are somewhat less complete in types
      G2 (d = 3) and Cn , just as in the subregular case.
    It is a striking fact that, in all of these cases, the dimension formulas for
simple modules have the same quotient format as Weyl’s formula. There is a
constant denominator, together with a numerator written as the product of N
factors: p repeated d times (in accordance with Premet’s Theorem), as well
as N − d other factors. Each of these factors involves an affine expression in
the coordinates of a ρ-shifted weight based in one reference alcove. One or
more weights will minimize the numerator, giving a dimension equal to pd after
dividing by the denominator.
    The main drawback to these formulas is that there is a separate one for
each simple module (or small family of simple modules) in a typical block.
Moreover, there is no obvious way to predict the formulas in advance, apart
from the occurrence of pd .


5     Example: B2
To explain more concretely our approach to dimension formulas, we look at
type B2 (say p ≥ 5). Denote the simple roots by α1 (long) and α2 (short), with
corresponding fundamental weights ̟1 and ̟2 .

5.1
Consider the case when χ lies in the minimal nilpotent orbit (with N = 4, d = 2).
Here χ has standard Levi form, relative to the subset I = {α1 }. There is a one-
dimensional torus T0 in CG (χ) which acts naturally on Uχ (g)-modules. A generic
block has four simple modules Lχ (λ), each labelled by two “highest” weights λ
linked by the subgroup of W generated by the simple reflection s1 . The dimen-
sions of the Lχ (λ) were first worked out by Jantzen in [7]; he later developed a
streamlined version based on the systematic use of translation functors in [11,
§5]. As required by Premet’s Theorem, p2 divides all dimensions.
    To parametrize the simple modules by weights, Jantzen starts in the con-
ventional lowest alcove of the dominant Weyl chamber, fixing a p-regular weight
λ. In order to simplify formulas, he builds in the ρ-shift by writing λ + ρ =
r̟1 + s̟2 = (r, s). Thus r, s > 0 while 2r + s < p. The dimensions of simple
modules corresponding to linked weights in the four restricted alcoves are:
       s(p − 2r − s) 2 2pr 2 (2p − s)(p − 2r − s) 2 s(p + 2r + s) 2
                    p ,   p ,                    p               p .
             2          2             2                   2
Notice that there are two choices of (r, s) which yield a simple module of smallest
possible dimension p2 : ((p − 3)/2, 1) and ((p − 3)/2, 2). These weights (which
parametrize a single module) lie in the second restricted alcove, which suggests
that we might instead view that alcove as “lowest” and use a weight there to
rewrite Jantzen’s formulas. The alcove in question is labelled A in Figure 1.

                                        5
                                                  ❅
                                                   ❅
                                                     ❅
                                                D   E ❅
                                                       ❅
                                                        ❅
                                      ❅
                                       ❅    B          C
                                        ❅
                                         A❅
                                           ❅
                                             ❅

                       Figure 1: Some alcoves for type B2


    The four dimensions above correspond to linked weights in the respective al-
coves A, B, C, D. The simple module of dimension p2 corresponds to two weights
in the lower left corner of alcove A, as close to both vertical and horizontal walls
as possible. Moreover, the dimension formula s(p − 2r − s)p2 /2 for alcove A
corresponds in a transparent way to the defining equations s = 0 and 2r + s = p
of these two hyperplanes (if we retain Jantzen’s standard coordinates). The two
special weights minimize the numerator in this dimension formula, giving 2p2 ;
the denominator is then needed to cancel the 2. In this way, we can begin to
imitate the interpretation of Weyl’s formula in Section 3.

5.2
To develop further the analogy with the restricted case, we have to rewrite the
dimension formula for alcove A in terms of new (ρ-shifted) coordinates (r, s) of
a weight in this alcove. Set

                           δ(r, s) := s(2r + s − p)p2 /2.

Now the idea is to apply this formula to the (ρ-shifted) coordinates (r, s) of an
arbitrary weight, in the spirit of Weyl’s formula. In particular the formula yields
0 when applied to a weight in the indicated orthogonal hyperplanes bounding
alcove A below.
    Write briefly δA , δB , . . . for the formal dimensions obtained by applying δ
to linked weights in alcoves A, B, . . . Denoting the corresponding simple Uχ (g)-
modules by LA , LB , . . . , we find the following pattern:

                           dim LA    = δA
                           dim LB    = δB − δA
                           dim LC    = δC − δB + δA
                           dim LD    = δD − δB + δA


                                         6
This in turn raises the question of the possible existence of modules Vχ (λ)
(analogous to Weyl modules in the case χ = 0) having dimensions given by the
function δ. These should exist for weights lying in an appropriate collection of
alcoves (here infinite) and should be modules for Uχ (g) as well as for CG (χ).
    The alternating sum formulas above are certainly suggestive of a general
pattern, though we usually must expect (as for χ = 0) coefficients of absolute
value > 1 coming from Kazhdan–Lusztig theory. In our example, alcove E
should carry the simple module LA , but the most likely alternating sum formula
will produce a multiple of its dimension such as 3δA . This suggests associating
to a weight in alcove E a Uχ (g)-module together with a nontrivial representation
of an SL2 -type subgroup of CG (χ) (whose trivial representation would occur for
alcove A). Such a pairing, somewhat analogous to the Springer Correspondence,
would be compatible with Lusztig’s cell conjectures [12, §10].
    In any case, the main thrust of our formulation is the derivation of diverse-
looking dimension formulas from a single formula based on a special choice of
affine hyperplanes. This much can be conjectured in general, but the explana-
tion for such regularity remains speculative.


6     Kazhdan–Lusztig cells and hyperplanes
6.1
How can one identify suitable affine hyperplanes which might support a version
of Weyl’s dimension formula for arbitrary nilpotent χ, in the spirit of the above
discussion of the minimal nilpotent orbit for type B2 ? An answer is suggested
by Lusztig’s bijection [12] between nilpotent orbits (in good characteristic) and
two-sided cells in the affine Weyl group (for the Langlands dual of G). As shown
by Lusztig and Xi [18], each two-sided cell in turn meets the dominant Weyl
chamber in a “canonical” left cell. In characteristic p we identify the affine Weyl
group in question with Wp , allowing us to view the cells as unions of p-alcoves.
    For example, the minimal nilpotent orbit of B2 corresponds to the canonical
left cell whose lower portion (beginning with alcoves A, B, . . . ) is the strip along
one wall pictured in Figure 2. To rewrite the previous discussion of dimensions
in terms of weights lying in these translated alcoves, we just have to redefine
the function δ by

                        δ(r, s) := (s − p)(2r + s − 2p)p2 /2.

This leads to the same dimension formulas as in Sec. 5.
    Empirical study of Jantzen’s formulas in a variety of cases shows a strong
correlation with the hyperplanes bounding below the canonical left cell for χ
(but with hyperplanes bounding the dominant region omitted). This is the
rationale for our reformulation of his B2 results above.
    In the B2 example, there are two orthogonal hyperplanes, corresponding to
an A1 × A1 root system. In other cases studied one gets more complicated
root systems, taking in each case the natural hyperplanes corresponding to the


                                          7
                ❅
                ❅               ❅
                                 ❅
                  ❅                ❅
                   ❅          D   E ❅
                     ❅               ❅
                      ❅               ❅
                        ❅
                         ❅    B   C
                          ❅
                           A❅
                             ❅
                               ❅
                ❅
                 ❅
                  ❅
                    ❅
                     ❅
                       ❅




           Figure 2: Lower part of a canonical left cell for type B2


associated positive roots as a framework for the basic dimension formula. Of
course, when χ = 0 we are just reverting to Weyl’s formula in this way. Such
hyperplane systems must come from various proper subsets of the extended
Dynkin diagram.

6.2
This type of interpretation agrees well with the location of weights which yield
dim Lχ (λ) = pd , as in the B2 example. However, this small example is oversim-
plified in some respects. There are several complicating factors in the attempt
to correlate Uχ (g)-modules with cells:

 (a) It is not easy to describe geometrically the lower boundary behavior of
     canonical left cells, though the work of Shi [21] in type A (and further work
     by him and his associates in other cases) provides a lot of combinatorial
     data. It is clear that one cannot in general expect to find a unique lowest
     alcove in a canonical left cell. For example, the minimal orbit for type
     A3 (where N = 6 and d = 3) yields a cell with two symmetrically placed
     configurations of lower hyperplanes of A2 type. Here one expects three
     factors corresponding to positive roots of A2 in the conjectural dimension
     formulas.

 (b) One cannot always point to an obvious hyperplane configuration of the
     right size. An extreme case to keep in mind is the minimal nilpotent orbit
     of E8 , where N = 120 and d = 29. The 91 expected factors in a dimension
     formula might well arise from a combination of the 28 positive roots in an


                                       8
      A7 root system and another 63 positive roots in an E7 root system (both
      found in the extended Dynkin diagram). It is unclear how to predict such
      patterns in general, though they may be related to a duality for nilpotent
      orbits studied by Sommers. Note that for type A one has a simple version
      of duality (based on transpose partitions) which might suggest a natural
      choice of hyperplanes.
  (c) When the component group CG (χ)/CG (χ)◦ is nontrivial, it may permute a
      number of nonisomorphic simple modules having the same dimension [10].
      This already shows up in subregular cases for B2 or G2 , in a way that looks
      consistent with Lusztig’s conjectures in [12, §10]: each intersection of a
      left cell with its inverse should correspond to an orbit of the component
      group in the set of simple modules belonging to a typical block of Uχ (g).

6.3
How can one construct modules Vχ (λ) for Uχ (g) and CG (χ) which carry dimen-
sion formulas of the shape we have described? One approach has been initiated
by Mirković and Rumynin [19], but many technical problems remain. The nat-
ural starting point is the Springer fiber associated with χ, whose dimension is
N − d.
    Ultimately all of this should connect naturally with the ideas of Lusztig [13,
14, 15, 16, 17] involving Springer fibers, equivariant K-theory, affine Hecke alge-
bras, cells, etc. Significant progress has recently been made by Bezrukavnikov,
Mirković, and Rumynin [2].
Acknowledgments. Conversations and correspondence with Jens Carsten Jantzen have been
extremely useful in formulating the ideas here, though he should not be held responsible for
my speculative suggestions. I am also grateful to Roman Bezrukavnikov, Paul Gunnells, Ivan
Mirković, Jian Yi Shi, and Eric Sommers for useful consultations.



References
 1. H.H. Andersen, J.C. Jantzen, and W. Soergel, Representations of quantum
    groups at a p-th root of unity and of semisimple groups in characteristic p:
    independence of p, Astérisque 220 (1994).
 2. R. Bezrukavnikov, I. Mirković, D. Rumynin, Localization of modules for a
    semisimple Lie algebra in prime characteristic, arXiv:math.RT/0205144.
 3. K.A. Brown and I. Gordon, The ramification of centres: Lie algebras in pos-
    itive characteristic and quantised enveloping algebras, Math. Z. 238 (2001),
    733–779.
 4. E.M. Friedlander and B.J. Parshall, Deformations of Lie algebra represen-
    tations, Amer. J. Math. 112 (1990), 375–395.



                                             9
 5. J.E. Humphreys, Modular representations of simple Lie algebras, Bull.
    Amer. Math. Soc. (N.S.) 35 (1998), 105–122.
 6. J.C. Jantzen, “Representations of Algebraic Groups”, Academic Press, Or-
    lando, 1987.
 7. J.C. Jantzen, Representations of so5 in prime characteristic, Aarhus Univ.
    Preprint Series, No. 13, 1997.
 8. J.C. Jantzen, Representations of Lie algebras in prime characteristic, Notes
    by Iain Gordon. in NATO Adv. Sci. Inst. Ser. C Math. Phys. Sci., 514,
    “Representation theories and algebraic geometry (Montreal, 1997)”, 185–
    235, Kluwer Acad. Publ., Dordrecht, 1998.
 9. J.C. Jantzen, Subregular nilpotent representations of sln and so2n+1 , Math.
    Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc. 126 (1999), 223–257.
10. J.C. Jantzen, Subregular nilpotent representations of Lie algebras in prime
    characteristic, Represent. Theory 3 (1999), 153–222 (electronic).
11. J.C. Jantzen, Modular representations of reductive Lie algebras, J. Pure
    Appl. Algebra 152 (2000), 133–185.
12. G. Lusztig, Cells in affine Weyl groups. IV, J. Fac. Sci. Univ. Tokyo Sect.
    IA Math. 36 (1989), 297–328.
13. G. Lusztig, Periodic W -graphs, Represent. Theory 1 (1997), 207–279 (elec-
    tronic).
14. G. Lusztig, Bases in equivariant K-theory, Represent. Theory 2 (1998),
    298–369 (electronic).
15. G. Lusztig, Subregular nilpotent elements and bases in K-theory, Canad.
    J. Math. 51 (1999), 1194–1225.
16. G. Lusztig, Bases in equivariant K-theory, II, Represent. Theory 3 (1999),
    281–353 (electronic).
17. G. Lusztig, Representation theory in characteristic p, in “Taniguchi Con-
    ference On Mathematics Nara ’98”, 167–178, Adv. Stud. Pure Math., 31,
    Math. Soc. Japan, Tokyo, 2001.
18. G. Lusztig and N. Xi, Canonical left cells in affine Weyl groups, Adv. in
    Math. 72 (1988), 284–288.
19. I. Mirković and D. Rumynin, Geometric representation theory of restricted
    Lie algebras, Transform. Groups 6 (2001), 175–191.
20. A. Premet, Irreducible representations of Lie algebras of reductive groups
    and the Kac–Weisfeiler conjecture, Invent. Math. 121 (1995), 79–117.



                                      10
21. Jian Yi Shi, “The Kazhdan–Lusztig cells in certain affine Weyl groups”,
    Lecture Notes in Mathematics, 1179, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1986.
22. R. Steinberg, Representations of algebraic groups, Nagoya Math. J. 22
    (1963), 33–56.




                                    11
