arXiv:math/0501220v1 [math.RT] 14 Jan 2005




                                                    Applications of the category of linear
                                                 complexes of tilting modules associated with
                                                                the category O
                                                                      Volodymyr Mazorchuk


                                                                                Abstract
                                                      We use the category of linear complexes of tilting modules for
                                                   the BGG category O , associated with a semi-simple complex finite-
                                                   dimensional Lie algebra g, to reprove in purely algebraic way several
                                                   known results about O obtained earlier by different authors using
                                                   geometric methods. We also obtain several new results about the
                                                   parabolic category O (p, Λ).


                                             1     Introduction and preliminaries
                                             Let g be a semi-simple complex finite-dimensional Lie algebra with a fixed
                                             triangular decomposition, g = n− ⊕ h ⊕ n+ , and π be the corresponding
                                             basis of the root system of g. Let further ρ be the half of the sum of all
                                             positive roots and W be the Weyl group of g. For w ∈ W and λ ∈ h∗ set
                                             w · λ = w(λ + ρ) − ρ. Denote by w0 the longest element of W and by l
                                             the length function on W. We consider W as the partially ordered set with
                                             respect to the Bruhat order < under the convention that the identity e is the
                                             smallest element.
                                                 Consider the principal block O 0 of the BGG category O for g, associated
                                             with the triangular decomposition above (see [BGG, So1]). This category is
                                             a highest weight category in the sense of [CPS] and hence is equivalent to the
                                             module category of some finite-dimensional associative quasi-hereditary basic
                                             algebra, which we denote by A (see [BGG, DR]). The Chevalley involution
                                             on g induces a natural involutive contravariant exact self-equivalence on O,
                                             and hence on A−mod, which we will denote by ⋆. The isomorphism classes
                                             of simple modules in O 0 (and thus also in A−mod) are in natural bijection
                                             with the elements of W under the convention that e corresponds to the one-
                                             dimensional module in O 0 . For w ∈ W we introduce the following notation:

                                                                                    1
   • L(w) is the simple A-module, which corresponds to the simple highest
     weight module in O with the highest weight w · 0 (see [Di, Chapter 7]);

   • ∆(w) is the standard A-module corresponding to L(w) (in O the mod-
     ule ∆(w) is the Verma module with the highest weight w · 0, see [Di,
     Chapter 7]);

   • ∇(w) = ∆(w)⋆ is the corresponding costandard module for A (the dual
     Verma module in O);

   • P (w) is the projective cover of L(w);

   • I(w) = P (w)⋆ is the injective envelope of L(w);

   • T (w) is the indecomposable tilting A-module, which corresponds to
     ∆(w) (see [Ri]).
The principal result about the category O is the so-called Kazhdan-Lusztig
(or, simply, the KL-) Theorem, proved in [BB, BK], which describes the
composition multiplicities of ∆(w) in terms of the Kazhdan-Lusztig com-
binatorics of the Hecke algebra, see [KL]. This result and the geometric
approach to O have been used by Soergel in [So1] to show that A is Koszul
and even Koszul self-dual. This was further extended in [BGS], where it
was shown that all associative algebras associated with the blocks of O are
Koszul and that the Koszul dual of the algebra of a singular block of O is the
algebra of the regular block of certain parabolic generalization of O, intro-
duced by Rocha-Caridi in [RC]. In [Ba] this result was even further extended
to all parabolic-singular blocks. Both [BGS] and [Ba] use “heavy” geometric
arguments.
     The algebra A can be given a nice combinatorial description via the
coinvariant algebra C associated with W. In [So1] it is shown that C ∼      =
EndA (P (w0 )); that the module P (w0 ), viewed as a C-module, can be de-
scribed combinatorially; and that A ∼   = EndC (P (w0)C ) (see also [KSX] for
the last isomorphism). Furthermore, in [So1] it is shown that EndA (P (w0))
is isomorphic to the quotient of the polynomial algebra over a homogeneous
ideal, in particular, that it is Z-graded (however the grading is not unique).
If we let the generators of EndA (P (w0))to have degree 2, we obtain the grad-
ing which coincides with the grading on C obtained via interpretation of C
as the cohomology algebra of a certain flag manifold (see for example [Hi]).
Further, the combinatorial construction of Soergel implies that P (w0 ) is a
Z-graded C-module, which makes A into a Z-graded algebra. In [BGS] it was
shown that this grading is the Koszul grading on A using some arguments
from the “mixed” geometry.

                                      2
     The paper [St] initiates the study of the graded version of the category O
with respect to the “natural” grading described above. It is important that
Soergel’s combinatorial description and hence the natural grading on A do not
depend on the KL-Theorem. In particular, in [St] the author obtains several
results about the graded version of the category O, which do not depend on
the KL-Theorem. It seems that there is a hope that the graded approach
might be a way to give an algebraic proof of the KL-Theorem. Because of
Vogan’s formulation of the KL-Theorem, see [Vo], and the graded description
of the translation functors from [St], the KL-Theorem would follow if one
would show that the natural grading on A is positive in the sense that all non-
zero components have non-negative degrees, and the radical of A coincides
with the sum of all components of positive degrees. However, so far this
seems to be very difficult.
     Let us now consider A as a graded algebra with respect to the natural
grading. Then it is easy to see that all simple, projective, injective, standard
and costandard modules admit graded lifts. In [MO, Zh] it was shown that
in this case all tilting modules admit graded lifts as well. In particular, the
Ringel dual R(A) of A (see [Ri]) is automatically graded. Fixing natural
graded lifts of indecomposable tilting modules one can consider the category
T(A) of linear complexes of tilting modules for A. In [MO] it was shown
that T(A) is equivalent to the category of locally finite-dimensional graded
modules over the quadratic dual R(A)! of R(A). Using the Koszul self-duality
of A (see [So1]) and the Ringel self-duality of A (see [So2]), one obtains that
T(A) is equivalent to the category of locally finite-dimensional graded A-
modules. In the present paper we would like to derive several consequences
from this fact.
     In the present paper we use two “heavy” prerequisites. The first one is
the KL-Theorem. Using the tilting module approach together with the KL-
combinatorics (which follows from the KL-Theorem) we show in Section 2
that A is Koszul and that the natural grading on A is the Koszul one. How-
ever, we are not able to derive the Koszul self-duality for A by our methods,
hence we use this result of Soergel as the second “heavy” prerequisite. In
Section 3 we give a brief synopsis about the category of linear complexes of
tilting modules for a quasi-hereditary algebra, studied in [MO], and list some
corollaries for the category O 0 . In Section 4 we show that the associative
algebras, associated to all singular blocks of O are Koszul. Already on this
stage we need Koszul self-duality for A. We also use the machinery developed
in [MO]. In Section 5 we recall the definition of the parabolic category O S
due to Rocha-Caridi, [RC], and show that all (regular and singular) blocks of
this category are Koszul. This result happens to be a relatively easy corollary
from the corresponding result for the singular blocks of O, which we prove

                                       3
earlier. It is possibly interesting to point out that the statement that the
regular block of O S is Koszul does not require Soergel’s Koszul self-duality
result. In Section 6 we define a new properly stratified (in the sense of [Dl])
parabolic generalization of O and O S . Roughly speaking, it is the transla-
tion of a singular block of O out of the wall. We use this category and the
corresponding category of linear complexes of tilting modules to reprove in
Section 7 the parabolic-singular Koszul dualities from [BGS, Ba] in a purely
algebraic way.
    Apart from the KL-Theorem and Soergel’s Koszul self-duality result, the
main ingredients of this proof are:

   • the way the composition of the Ringel and Koszul self-dualities on A
     permute the primitive idempotents, see [So1, So2];

   • the way the quadratic duality, defined via linear complexes of tilting
     modules, works.

    The simple modules in a singular block of O are indexed by certain left
cosets in W. The simple modules in the corresponding parabolic category
are indexed by the corresponding right cosets. The composition of the Ringel
and Koszul self-dualities of A switches the left and the right cosets in W and,
applied to a certain subcategory of T(A), gives the necessary duality. It is
again perhaps interesting to note that for a finite-dimensional semi-simple
Lie algebra g the Ringel self-duality of O 0 does not require the approach
proposed in [So2], which is based on Arkhipov’s twisting functor. Instead
one can use a direct approach from [FKM], based on the translation functors,
which substantially simplifies the argument.
    The necessary preliminaries about the quadratic duality are collected in
Section 3, where it is shown that this duality always switches the centralizer
algebras, similar to those considered in Section 6, and the quotient algebras,
similar to the blocks of O S .
    Finally, we use T(A) to study the properties of the parabolic generaliza-
tion O(p, Λ) of O, considered in [FKM] (or, equivalently, using [BG], certain
singular blocks in the category of Harish-Chandra bimodules for g). The
blocks of this category are equivalent to the module categories of certain
properly stratified algebras, see [FKM]. Most of our results here are about
the regular blocks. We show that the standard modules in the regular blocks
have linear tilting coresolutions and that the costandard modules in the reg-
ular blocks have linear tilting resolutions. This can be proved in at least
two different ways. The first way is analogous to that for O 0 and uses the
properties of translation functors. The second way uses the existence of a
non-standard BGG-type resolutions for certain highest weight modules. We

                                      4
further compute the quadratic dual to the properly stratified algebra of the
regular block of O(p, Λ), which happens to be the parabolic quotient of A
similar to O S , but related to the left cosets instead of the right cosets. This
is one more evidence for the strong asymmetry of O with respect to the left
and the right cosets of W (the first one was obtained in [MS1]). However, this
result gives a possibility to describe the lawyers of the tilting (co)resolutions
of standard and costandard modules from O(p, Λ)in terms of the Kazhdan-
Lusztig combinatorics. We also derive several facts about the extensions
between standard and proper standard modules in O(p, Λ).


2     Koszulity of the natural grading for the
      regular blocks
In this section we use only the KL-Theorem (in particular, in Vogan’s for-
mulation) and do not use Soergel’s Koszul self-duality of A. We recall that
a quasi-hereditary algebra is called standard Koszul, [ADL], provided that
it is positively graded, all standard modules admit linear projective reso-
lutions (meaning the the l-th term of the resolution is generated in degree
l), and all costandard modules admit linear injective coresolutions (meaning
the the l-th term of the coresolution is cogenerated in degree −l). By [ADL,
Theorem 1], every standard Koszul quasi-hereditary algebra is Koszul.
    In all categories of graded modules and for all k ∈ Z we denote by hki the
functor of the shift of grading, which maps the degree l to the degree l − k.
For categories of complexes and for all k ∈ Z we denote by [k] the functor
of the shift of the position in a complex, which maps the position l to the
position l − k.
    According to [So1] and [KSX], the C-module P (w0 ) admits a decom-
position, P (w0)C = ⊕w∈W D(w), with indecomposable modules D(w) con-
structed recursively as follows. D(e) is the simple C-module, which we con-
sider as the graded module, concentrated in degree 0. For a simple reflection,
s ∈ W, we denote by Cs the subalgebra of s-invariants in C. Let w ∈ W
and w = s1 . . . sk be a reduced decomposition of w. Then the module

                 D̃(w) = C ⊗Csk C ⊗Csk−1 · · · ⊗Cs1 D(e)hki

has one dimensional component of degree −k. The module D(w) is the
indecomposable direct summand of D̃(w) such that D(w)−k 6= 0. This fixes
a grading on P (w0)C and makes the algebra A = EndC (P (w0 )C ) into a
graded algebra, see [So1]. We call this grading on A natural. We denote by
A−mod and A−grmod the categories of all finitely generated A-modules and

                                       5
all finitely generated graded (with respect to the natural grading) A-modules
respectively. Remark that the morphisms in A−grmod are homogeneous
maps of degree 0. We set extA = ExtA−grmod , homA = HomA−grmod .
     For standard graded lifts we will use the same symbol as for ungraded
modules. In particular, we set L = ⊕w∈W L(w) and same for P , I, T , ∆,
∇, both for graded and ungraded modules. We concentrate L in degree 0
and fix a grading on P such that the natural map P ։ L is a morphism in
A−grmod. Further, we fix a grading on I such that the natural map L ֒→ I
is a morphism in A−grmod. The natural maps P ։ ∆ and ∇ ։ I then
automatically induce gradings on ∆ and ∇. Further, we fix the grading on
T such that the natural map ∆ ֒→ T is a morphism in A−grmod. It follows
then automatically that the natural map T ։ ∇ is a morphism in A−grmod,
we refer the reader to [MO] for details.
     By [St, Section 6] the duality ⋆ lifts to a duality on A−grmod, which
we will denote by the same symbol. Note that ⋆ acts on degrees via mul-
tiplication with −1. Let s be a simple reflection and θs be the translation
functor through the s-wall, see [Ja]. This functor is exact and self-adjoint.
In [St] it was shown that θs admits a graded lift, that is it lifts to an exact
and self-adjoint functor on A−grmod. Furthermore, Vogan’s version of the
KL-Theorem, [Vo], asserts that this lift can be chosen such that (θs L)i = 0
for all i 6= −1, 0, 1 and such that (θs L)0 is a semi-simple module. Now we are
going to use this to prove the following main result of the present section,
first proved in [So1, Theorem 18] and [BGS, 4.5].

Theorem 2.1. A is a standard Koszul quasi-hereditary algebra and the nat-
ural grading on A is Koszul.

    To prove this we will need some preparation. We start with the following
result, which is a graded version of [FKM, Proposition 4].

Proposition 2.1. (i) Let w ∈ W then there is an inclusion (of graded
    modules) T (w0 w)h−l(w0 )i ֒→ P (w).

 (ii) The restriction from P to T h−l(w0 )i (the latter considered as a submod-
      ule of P via the inclusion constructed in (i)) induces an isomorphism,

                           A = EndA (P ) ∼
                                         = EndA (T ) = R(A),

     of graded algebras.

Proof. We start with the ungraded version, proved in [FKM, Proposition 4].
Let w = s1 . . . sk be a reduced decomposition of w. Using the induction on
l(w) one shows that applying θsk . . . θs1 to the ungraded inclusion T (w0 ) ֒→

                                        6
P (e) induces the ungraded inclusion T (w0 w) ֒→ P (w). This proves the
ungraded analogue of (i) and the ungraded analogue of (ii) follows from (i)
using Enright’s completion functor.
    Obviously, the graded version of (ii) follows from the graded version of
(i) and the ungraded version of (ii). Hence we are left to prove the graded
version of (i). We start with

                           T (w0 )h−l(w0 )i ֒→ P (e).                      (1)

Since T (w0 ) is the simple socle of ∆(x) for every x ∈ W we certainly have
T (w0 )h−k(x)i ֒→ ∆(x) for some k(x). In particular, k(w0 ) = 0 since T (w0 ) ∼
                                                                              =
∆(w0 ). Using induction on l(x), graded translation functors, and [St, Theo-
rem 3.6] one shows that k(x) = l(w0 ) − l(x), in particular, k(e) = l(w0 ). Now
(1) follows from the observation that P (e) ∼  = ∆(e).
    The rest follows again by induction on l(w) applying the graded transla-
tion θsk . . . θs1 to (1) and using [St, Theorem 3.6].

Proposition 2.2. R(A) is a positively graded algebra.

Proof. By definition (see [Ri]) every indecomposable summand of T has both
a standard and a costandard (graded) filtration, that is a filtration, whose
subquotients are standard and costandard modules respectively. Moreover,
every indecomposable summand is self-dual (with respect to ⋆). Every (un-
graded) morphism from T (x) to T (y), x, y ∈ W, is a linear combination of
morphisms, each of which is induced by a (unique up to a non-zero scalar)
map from some subquotient of a standard filtration of T (x) to some subquo-
tient of a costandard filtration of T (y). This means that the statement of
the proposition follows from the following lemma.
Lemma 2.1. Let x ∈ W. Then every subquotient of any standard filtration
of T (x), which is not isomorphic to ∆(x), has the form ∆(y)hli with l > 0.
Proof. We prove this by a downward induction on l(x) with the basis x = w0
being obvious. Let now x ∈ W and s be a simple reflection such that
l(x) > l(xs). Consider the modules T (x) and θs T (x). Using [St, Theorem 3.6]
and the inductive assumption we obtain that

(a) every subquotient of any standard filtration of θs T (x) has the form
    ∆(y)hli with l ≥ 0.

The question is when we can get l = 0? First of all, again by [St, Theorem 3.6]
we obtain that ∆(xs) occurs as a subquotient of any standard filtration of
θs T (x).


                                       7
     Fix now y 6= xs such that ∆(y) occurs a subquotient of any standard
filtration of θs T (x). Using [St, Theorem 3.6] and the inductive assumption,
we get that every such occurrence comes from some occurrence of ∆(y)h1i
as a subquotient of some standard filtration of T (x). Moreover, ys > y. Let
my denote the multiplicity of ∆(y)h1i in T (x).
     First we claim that my ≤ dim ext1A (L(y)h1i, L(x)). Indeed, let f be
a direct sum of all primitive idempotents of R(A), which correspond to
z ∈ W such that l(z) ≥ l(x). By induction we can assume that the grading
of f R(A)f is positive. Using Proposition 2.1 and the graded contravari-
ant Ringel duality functor homA (− , ⊕l∈Z T hli), the statement reduces to the
analogous statement for projective modules. But for projective modules
over positively graded quasi-hereditary algebras the corresponding inequality
my ≤ dim ext1A (L(w0 x), L(w0 y)h−1i) is obvious.
     Now we recall the KL-combinatorics. From [Ir, Proposition 5.2.3], the
graded Ringel self-duality, and the KL-Theorem it follows that we have the
following decomposition in A−mod:

            θs T (x) ∼
                                  M
                                        dim Ext1A (L(y), L(x)) T (y).
                                                              
                     = T (xs) ⊕                                            (2)
                               y>x,ys>y

    Let us recall that all tilting modules are self-dual (even as graded mod-
ules). This and (a) implies that (2) must be the case even in A−grmod
(otherwise any shifted direct summand must come with an isomorphic direct
summand shifted in the opposite way, which would imply that there should
occur some ∆(u)hti, t < 0, in any standard filtration of θs T (x), contradicting
(a)). Further, since the s-translation of a standard filtration of T (x) gives
rise to a standard filtration of θs T (x) in a canonical way, it follows from [St,
Theorem 3.6] that in A−grmod the multiplicity of T (y) as a direct summand
of θs T (x) can not exceed my . Since

           my ≤ dim ext1A (L(y)h1i, L(x)) ≤ dim Ext1A (L(y), L(x)),

it follows that

            my = dim ext1A (L(y)h1i, L(x)) = dim Ext1A (L(y), L(x)),          (3)

which means that each occurrence of ∆(y) as a subquotient of a standard
filtration of θs T (x) in fact comes from a direct summand of θs T (x), which
is isomorphic to T (y). This implies that every subquotient of any standard
filtration of T (xs), which is not isomorphic to ∆(xs), has the form ∆(z)hli
with l > 0, and completes the proof.



                                          8
   The proof of Proposition 2.2 suggests the following immediate corollary
from [Ir, Proposition 5.2.3] and Proposition 2.1:
Corollary 2.1. Let x ∈ W and s be a simple reflection. Then
             (
              T (x)h1i ⊕ T (x)h−1i,                          xs > x;
  θs T (x) ∼
           =           L               1
                                                     
              T (xs) ⊕ y>x,ys>y dim ExtA (L(y), L(x)) T (y), xs < x.

     Recall, that for a fixed graded module, M, over a graded algebra, A, the
complex X • is called linear provided that X i ∈ add(Mhii) for all i ∈ Z. Fur-
ther, recall that the A-module N is said to have a linear tilting (co)resolution
if the tilting (co)resolution of N is a linear complex with respect to the graded
lift of T fixed above.
Proposition 2.3. The module ∆ admits a (finite) linear tilting coresolution
and the module ∇ admits a (finite) linear tilting resolution.
Proof. By duality it is enough to prove the statement for ∆. It is fur-
ther enough to show that ∆(x) admits a linear tilting coresolution for every
x ∈ W. We show this by induction on l(w0 )−l(x). The basis of the induction
is obvious since ∆(w0 ) is a tilting module. Let x ∈ W and s be a simple reflec-
tion such that xs < x. By induction we can assume that ∆(x) has the linear
tilting coresolution T • (∆(x)). Applying θs we obtain a tilting coresolution
of θs ∆(x) and, since all tilting modules have costandard filtrations, the ad-
junction induces a morphism of complexes, ϕ• : θs T • (∆(x)) ։ T • (∆(x))h1i,
surjective on every component. Let Q• denote the cone of ϕ• shifted by [−1].
Then Q• is a tilting coresolution of ∆(xs).
     We claim that, taking away all trivial direct summands of Q• (that is
                                                     id
direct summands of the form · · · → 0 → T (z) → T (z) → 0 → . . . ), Q•
                                   •
reduces to a linear complex, Q , of tilting modules. Indeed, let us fix l ≥ 0
and let T l (∆(x)) ∼ = ⊕w∈W mw T (w)hli. Then, by Corollary 2.1, we have

     θs T l (∆(x)) ∼
                                           M                         M
                   = ⊕ws>w mw T (w)hl + 1i     ⊕ws>w mw T (w)hl − 1i    X,

where X ∈ add(T hli). It is easy to see that the morphism ϕ• induces an
isomorphism between the corresponding direct summands T (w)hl + 1i in
                                                  l
θs T l (∆(x)) and T l (∆(x))h1i, implying that Q ∈ add(T hli ⊕ T hl − 1i).
    On the other hand, let f • be the differential in T • (∆(x)). Then each
occurrence of T (w)hli in T l (∆(x)) comes from some standard subquotient
∆(w)hli in the cokernel of f l−2 and thus in T l−1 (∆(x)). Hence, by Corol-
lary 2.1, in the case ws > w it gives rise to an occurrence of T (w)hl − 1i
in θs T l−1 (∆(x)). Further, we obtain that θs f l induces a non-zero map and

                                       9
hence an isomorphism between the corresponding summands T (w)hl − 1i in
θs T l−1 (∆(x)) and in θs T l (∆(x)). This splits away and thus we obtain that
   l
Q ∈ add(T hli), completing the proof.
Corollary 2.2. The module ∆ admits a (finite) linear projective resolution
and the module ∇ admits a (finite) linear injective coresolution.
Proof. This follows from Proposition 2.3 and the graded Ringel self-duality
of A.
Proof of Theorem 2.1. From Proposition 2.2 we already know that the in-
duced grading on R(A) is positive. Hence the natural grading on A is positive
by Proposition 2.1(ii). By Corollary 2.2, every standard A-module admits
a linear projective resolution, and every costandard A-module admits a lin-
ear injective coresolution. This means that A is a standard Koszul quasi-
hereditary algebra with respect to the underlying (natural) grading. The
theorem is proved.


3     The category of linear complexes of tilting
      modules
3.1    Quadratic dual via linear complexes
Let A = ⊕i≥0 Ai be a basic positively graded algebra over some field k with
finite-dimensional graded components. Denote by A−fgmod the category of
all graded A-modules with finite-dimensional graded components. Let us fix
the natural gradings on simple and projective A-modules, which is induced
from the positive grading on A. Let P(A) denote the category, whose objects
are all linear complexes of finitely generated projective A-modules, that is
X • ∈ P(A) if and only if X l ∈ add (A Ahli) for all l ∈ Z, and morphism are
all possible morphisms of complexes of graded modules. For an A-module,
M, we denote by M • the complex satisfying M 0 = M and M l = 0 for all
l 6= 0. For a k-vector space, V , we set V ∗ = Homk (V, k). For two k-vector
space, V and W , and for f ∈ Homk (V, W ) we denote by f ∗ the corresponding
dual map from Homk (W ∗ , V ∗ ). For finite-dimensional V and W we have an
obvious canonical isomorphism, (V ⊗k W )∗ ∼   = V ∗ ⊗k W ∗ .
    Denote further by A! the quadratic dual of A, defined as follows: A! =
A0 [A∗1 ]/ (µ∗ (A∗2 )), where µ : A1 ⊗A0 A1 → A2 is the multiplication map.
                                                                           !
Note that A! is quadratic by definition. If A is quadratic we have A ∼= A!
canonically. Recall the following statement (see [MaSa, Theorem 2.4] or [MO,
Theorem 7]):

                                     10
Theorem 3.1. There is an equivalence, F : A! −fgmod ∼
                                                    = P(A).
    Let e ∈ A0 be an idempotent and let P e (A) denote the full subcategory
of P(A) which consists of all X • ∈ P(A) such that X l ∈ add (A Aehli). Note
that there is a canonical bijection between the idempotents in A and A!
(since both A and A! share the same semi-simple part A0 by definition). In
particular, we can define Be = A! /(A! (1 − e)A! ). In what follows we will need
the following easy corollary from Theorem 3.1:
Proposition 3.1. F induces the equivalence F e : (eAe)! −fgmod ∼      = P e (A).
In particular, (eAe)! ∼= Be as graded algebras with respect to the induced
gradings.
Proof. Every projective object from P e (A) is by definition the maximal quo-
tient of the corresponding projective object from P(A), which contains only
simple subquotients of the form add (A Ae• hli). This and [Au, Section 5]
imply the first statement, and the second statement follows from the first
one.

3.2    Application to the regular block of O
Let T(A) denote the category, whose objects are all bounded complexes X •
of graded A-modules satisfying X l ∈ add (T hli) for all l ∈ Z (such complexes
are called linear complexes of tilting modules), and morphisms are all usual
morphisms of complexes of graded modules, see [MO]. We also denote by
P(A) the category, whose objects are all bounded complexes X • of graded
A-modules satisfying X l ∈ add (P hli) for all l ∈ Z, and morphisms are all
usual morphisms of complexes of graded modules (such complexes are called
linear complexes of projective modules), see [MO].
Theorem 3.2. (i) There is an equivalence, F : A−fgmod ∼         = T(A), which
      sends L(w) to T (w0 w −1 w0 )• for every w ∈ W.
 (ii) There is an equivalence, G : A−fgmod ∼  = P(A), which sends L(w) to
           −1   •
      P (w w0 ) for every w ∈ W.
Proof. By Theorem 3.1 there is an equivalence, A! −fgmod ∼  = P(A). Apply-
ing the graded version of the Ringel duality from [So2] gives an equivalence,
R(A)! −fgmod ∼= T(A). Because of Proposition 2.1 we even obtain an equiv-
alence, A −fgmod ∼
         !
                  = T(A). However, A is Koszul and even Koszul self-dual
by [So1] and the natural grading on A is the Koszul one by Theorem 2.1.
Thus A! ∼= A by [BGS, 2.9], which proves the existence of both F and G.
The correspondence on simple objects follows from Proposition 2.1(i) and
[So1].

                                      11
4     Singular blocks of O and their Koszulity
Let G ⊂ W be a parabolic subgroup and w0G be the longest element in G.
Denote by WG the set of the longest coset representatives in W/G. Let
λ ∈ h∗ be a dominant integral (singular) weight with stabilizer G. Denote
by O λ the singular block of O, which corresponds to λ, and by AG the
corresponding basic associative algebra. The bijection between the simple
A-modules and the elements of W, described in the introduction, induces
a bijection between the isomorphism classes of simple AG -modules and the
cosets from W/G, and, also, the elements of WG . For AG -modules we will
use notation LG (w), w ∈ WG , etc. Soergel’s combinatorics from [So1] equips
AG with a natural grading in the following way. The algebra EndAG (PG (w0 ))
is the subalgebra CG of G-invariants in C, in particular, is graded. Moreover,
the module PG (w0 )CG is a graded module,. This induces a grading on AG ∼    =
                                                    on                    out
EndCG (PG (w0 )CG ), which we call natural. Let θG : O 0 → O λ and θG :
O λ → O 0 denote the functors of translations onto and out of the G-wall
respectively. These functors are left and right adjoint to each other. Set
        out on
θG = θG    θG . In the same way as it is done in Section 2 we fix the graded
lifts of simple, projective, injective, standard, costandard and tilting AG -
modules and will use for them analogous notation (for example LG (w) etc.).
The main result of the present section is the following statement.
Theorem 4.1. The algebra AG is a standard Koszul quasi-hereditary algebra,
and the natural grading on AG is the Koszul one.
    Again, to prove this theorem we will need some preparation.
Lemma 4.1. The natural grading on AG is positive.
                                                          out      on
Proof. Let x ∈ WG and y ∈ W. Then the adjointness of θG       and θG  gives
                  out
                      PG (x), L(y) ∼                  on
                                  
            HomA θG                 = HomAG (PG (x), θG  L(y)) .         (4)
                  on
However, since θG    sends simple A-modules to simple AG -modules or zero,
it follows that for a fixed y the right-hand side of (4) is either 0 for all
x, or is 0 for all x except one, for which it is equal to C. This implies
                                out
that the projective module θG       PG (x) is in fact indecomposable. Using [St,
                                      out
Theorem 8.2] it is easy to see that θG    admits a natural graded lift compatible
with the grading on both O λ and O 0 . In particular, it follows that the algebra
AG is a graded subalgebra of A and hence Theorem 2.1 implies that AG is
positively graded.
                                 out
Proposition 4.1. The module θG       ∆G (w)hl(w0G)i, w ∈ WG , admits a linear
tilting coresolution in A−grmod.

                                       12
Proof. Throughout the proof we fix w ∈ WG . For i = 0, 1, . . . , l(w0G ) let

            Wiw = {x ∈ w0 Gw −1 w0 : l(x) = l(w −1) − l(w0G ) + i},
                     w
                  W i = {x ∈ wG : l(x) = l(w) − l(w0G ) + i}
                                                   w
(in particular, W0w = {w0 w0G w −1 w0 } and W 0 = {ww0G }). For w ∈ W we
denote by T • (∆(w)) the linear tilting resolution of ∆(w).
                                                                            out
    For i = 0, 1, . . . , l(w0G ) let Xi denote the (non-graded) trace in θG    ∆G (w)
                                              w
of all P (x) such that there is y ∈ W i satisfying y ≥ x. We consider the
                                                            out
trace for non-graded modules, however, since both θG            ∆G (w) and P (x) are
                                                                 out
graded, the trace itself will be a graded submodule of θG            ∆G (w), see [MO,
Lemma 4]. Set Yi = (θG ∆G (w)) /Xi . In particular, we have X0 ∼
                             out
                                                                          = ∆(ww0G )
and Yl(w0G )−1 ∼
               = ∆(w).
Lemma 4.2. For all x ∈ wG and k > 0 we have the following equality:
ExtkA (θG
        out
            ∆G (w), ∆(x)) = 0.
                      out    on
Proof. The functors θG    , θG  are exact, left and right adjoint to each other,
and send projectives to projectives. Hence

  ExtkA θG
         out
             ∆G (w), ∆(x) = ExtkA (∆G (w), θG
                                            on
                         
                                               ∆(x)) =
                                                   = ExtkA (∆G (w), ∆G (w)) = 0

since Verma modules do not have self-extensions in O.
                                                                                   w
Lemma 4.3. Ext1A (Yi , ∆(x)) = C for i ∈ {0, 1, . . . , l(w0G ) − 1} and x ∈ W i .
Proof. Applying HomA (− , ∆(x)) to the short exact sequence
                                     out
                              Xi ֒→ θG   ∆G (w) ։ Yi

we obtain the following fragment in the long exact sequence:
                       ∼       out
                                               
  0 → HomA (Yi , ∆(x)) → HomA θG   ∆G (w), ∆(x) →
   → HomA (Xi , ∆(x)) → Ext1A (Yi , ∆(x)) → Ext1A θG
                                                   out
                                                                   
                                                       ∆G (w), ∆(x) → (5)

Since Yi surjects, by the definition, onto ∆(w), which, in turn, is a submodule
of ∆(x) by [Di, 7.7.7], we get HomA (Yi , ∆(x)) 6= 0. Using the adjointness of
 out       on
θG   and θG   , we obtain

        out
            ∆G (w), ∆(x) ∼                 on
                                              ∆(x)) ∼
                        
  HomA θG                 = HomA (∆G (w), θG        =
                                       = HomA (∆G (w), ∆G (w)) ∼
                                       ∼                       = C,

                                         13
which establishes the isomorphism indicated in (5). Further, the only stan-
dard subquotient of Xi , which maps to ∆(x) is ∆(x) itself, which implies
HomA (Xi , ∆(x)) ∼
                 = C. Finally, Ext1A (θG
                                       out
                                           ∆G (w), ∆(x)) = 0 by Lemma 4.2.
The exactness of (5) now gives the necessary statement.
    Lemma 4.3 implies that the modules Yi can be constructed recursively
starting from i = l(w0G ) and descending to i = 0. On every step of this
recursion one uses the universal extension procedure as L follows: we start
with Yl(w0G ) ∼
              = ∆(w) and proceed, involving the module x∈W wi ∆(x) on the
         G
step
L l(w0 ) − i. Note that non-isomorphic direct summands of the module
   x∈W i ∆(x) do not have self-extensions, see for example [RC, Section 9].
       w

    Let a be the semi-simple Lie subalgebra of g, associated with G. Ap-
plying the parabolic induction to the classical BGG-resolution of a finite-
dimensional a-module gives the following resolution,
               M                   M
       0→           ∆(x) → · · · →      ∆(x) → ∆(w0 w0G w −1 w0 ) → 0, (6)
            x∈W w     G)             x∈W1w
                   l(w0



of the generalized Verma module, which is the cokernel of the last non-
zero map in (6). By [MO, Theorem 8], the sequence (6) induces, via the
equivalence F from Theorem 3.2, the following complex of elements from
T(A):
        M                          M
  0→          T • (∆(x)) → · · · →   T • (∆(x)) → T • (∆(ww0G )) → 0. (7)
           w                             w
      x∈W l(wG )                     x∈W 1
               0


The sequence (7) is exact in all terms except the last one. This allows us
to take inductively the cone of all morphisms in (7) and, moreover, implies
that on every step the complex of tilting modules we obtain is isomorphic to
a linear complex of tilting modules. It is easy to see that the homology of
the complex, obtained on every step, is concentrated in a single position (in
particular, in position 0 on the last step). Let us denote this homology by
Zi , i = l(w0G ), l(w0G ) − 1, . . . .
     Let us show, by induction on i, that Zi ∼       = Yi−1 . This is obvious for
        G
i = l(w0 ). Note that the restriction of all differentials in the BGG resolution
to Verma modules are non-zero (see for example [RC, Section 10]). Let us
now assume that Zi ∼      = Yi−1 . In particular, we have Ext1A (Zi , ∆(x)) = C for
                w
every x ∈ W i−1 by Lemma 4.3. The cone construction of Zi−1          L now implies
that Zi−1 is obtained from Zi via the universal extension with x∈W w ∆(x).
                                                                           i−1
By the universality of this extension we obtain that Zi−1 must be isomorphic
to Yi−2 .

                                        14
     In particular, Z0 ∼
                       = θGout
                               ∆G (w)hl(w0G)i and this module has the linear
tilting coresolution as prove above.

Lemma 4.4. (i) Let w ∈ WG . Then the (ungraded) trace T rG (w) of
   PG (w0 ) in PG (w) is an indecomposable tilting AG -module. Moreover,
   for w 6= w ′, w ′ ∈ WG , we have T rG (w) ∼
                                             6= T rG (w ′ ).

 (ii) Restriction from PG to the trace of PG (w0 ) in PG establishes the Ringel
      self-duality of AG .

Proof. From Proposition 2.1 it follows that T (w0 w) is the trace of P (w0 ) in
         on
P (w). θG   sends L(w0 ) to LG (w0 ), which implies that the trace of P (w0) in
                                  on             on
P (w) is mapped to the trace of θG   P (w0 ) in θG  P (w). This and the fact that
  on
θG sends tilting modules to tilting modules implies that T rG (w) is a tilting
module. On the other hand, from [KSX, 3.1] we have that every PG (w) has
a two-step copresentation by modules from add (PG (w0 )). This implies that
the Auslander PG (w0 )-coapproximation of T rG (w), see [Au, Section 5], is
isomorphic to PG (w). Using the same arguments as in [FKM, Theorem 4.1]
we obtain that the restriction defines an isomorphism between the algebras
EndAG (PG ) and EndAG (⊕w∈WG T rG (w)). Both (i) and (ii) follow.
                                          out
Proof of Theorem 4.1. Observe that θG         sends tilting modules from O λ to
tilting modules from O 0 , and projective modules from O λ to projective mod-
                                       on                 out
ules from O 0 . Adjointness with θG        implies that θG    sends indecompos-
able projective modules to indecomposable projective modules. This and
                           out
Lemma 4.4 gives that θG         even sends indecomposable tilting modules to
indecomposable tilting modules. In particular, for every w ∈ WG the min-
imal tilting coresolution of ∆G (w) is sent to a minimal tilting coresolution
     out
of θG    ∆G (w). The last one is however linear (up to a shift of grading) by
                          out
Proposition 4.1. Since θG      is compatible with the gradings on O λ and O 0 ,
we obtain that the original tilting coresolution of ∆G (w) was linear. From
[MO, Theorem 6] it now follows that AG is standard Koszul with respect to
the natural grading.


5     The parabolic category of Rocha-Caridi
      and its Koszulity
Let now G and H be two parabolic subgroups of W, and λ and O λ be as
                              H
in Section 4. Let further WG     denote the set of all w ∈ W which are the
longest coset representatives in W/G and the shortest coset representatives
                                   H
in H\W at the same time. Let fG      be the sum of all primitive idempotents

                                       15
                                      H
                                                                             
of AG , which correspond to w ∈ WG      and set AH                      H
                                                  G = AG / AG (1 − fG )AG .
Then the algebra AH G is the associative algebra of Rocha-Caridi’s parabolic
subcategory of O λ , associated with H. This is the full subcategory o O λ ,
which consists of all modules, which are locally finite with respect to the
parabolic subalgebra p of g, associated with H. Let a be the semi-simple
part of p. The natural grading on AG induces a grading on AH  G in an obvious
way. We call the later grading again natural. The AH
                                                   G -modules  will be denoted
  H
LG (w) etc. The main result of this section is the following statement.

Theorem 5.1. The algebra AH  G is a standard Koszul quasi-hereditary algebra
                            H
and the natural grading on AG is the Koszul one.

Proof. It is clear that the natural grading on AHG is positive because the
natural grading on AG is positive. Hence, to complete the proof it would
suffice to show that standard AH G -modules admit linear tilting coresolution
                       H
and that costandard AG -modules admit linear tilting resolution and apply
[MO, Theorem 6].
    To show this we first forget about the grading for a moment. Let ZH :
AG −mod → AH   G −mod denote Zuckerman’s functor of taking the maximal
subquotient, which belongs to AH                     H
                                 G −mod. Let x ∈ WG and

                      0 → Pk → · · · → P0 → ∆G (x) → 0                        (8)

be a projective resolution of ∆G (x) ∈ AG −mod. Let us look at (8) inside
                                                                           H
O λ instead of AG −mod keeping the notation. Since every x ∈ WG               cor-
responds to an a-dominant weight by definition, the corresponding Verma
module ∆G (x) is obtained using the parabolic induction from some domi-
nant Verma a-modules. However, the dominant Verma module is projective
in the category O for the algebra a (we denote this category by O(a)). Since
U(g), considered as an a-module under the adjoint action, is a direct sum
of finite-dimensional modules, the parabolic induction reduces (on the level
of a-modules) to the tensoring with finite-dimensional modules. Hence we
obtain that ∆G (x) (in particular, ∆G (w0G )) is a (possibly infinite) direct sum
of projective modules from O(a). Since all projective modules in O λ have
Verma flag, it follows that all projective modules in O λ are (possibly infinite)
direct sums of projective modules from O(a) as well.
    This means that (8), considered as a sequence of a-modules, is a direct
                                                       id
sum of trivial sequences of the form · · · → 0 → X → X → 0 → . . . . Since
ZH commutes with the restriction to a (by definition), we obtain that the
sequence
                 0 → ZH Pk → · · · → ZH P0 → ZH ∆G (x) → 0                     (9)


                                       16
is exact. Since ZH sends projective AG -modules to projective AH   G -modules
or zero, (9) is in fact a projective resolution of the standard AH  G -module
ZG ∆G (x).
    Now let us go back to the graded algebras. From Theorem 4.1 we know
that AG is standard Koszul, in particular, all standard AG -modules admit
linear projective resolutions. This means that (8) can be chosen linear. Since
ZH obviously respects the grading, we get that (9) is linear as well. Hence
all standard AHG -modules admit linear projective resolutions. Applying ⋆ we
get the dual statement for the injective modules. This shows that AH      G is
standard Koszul, in particular, Koszul, by [ADL, Theorem 1], and completes
the proof.

Remark 5.1. We remark that for the algebra AH {e} the proof of Theorem 5.1
does not use Section 4 and hence does not use Soergel’s Koszul self-duality
result.


6    A new parabolic generalization of the cat-
     egory O
In this section we will develop one auxiliary tool, which we will later use in
Section 7. This is a new parabolic generalization of the category O , which is
not a highest weight category in general, but rather corresponds to a properly
stratified algebra. Roughly speaking, it the the translation of a singular block
of O (or some parabolic category) out of the wall.
                                                                       H
    Let G and H be two parabolic subgroups of W. Let further fG          be the
                                      H                                  H
sum of all primitive idempotents of A{e} , which correspond to w ∈ WG , and
set BH       H H    H
     G = fG A{e} fG . Let C(G) denote the coinvariant algebra of G, which
we consider as a graded algebra with respect to the grading for which the
generators have degree two.

Theorem 6.1.      (i) There is an isomorphism of graded algebras,

                                BH ∼ H
                                 G = AG ⊗C C(G);


 (ii) the algebra BH
                   G is properly stratified (in general not quasi-hereditary)
      and has a duality;

(iii) BH                                                       H
        G −mod is equivalent to the full subcategory X of A{e} −mod, which
      consists ofall X admitting
                                 a two-step projective presentation by modules
                    H   H
      from add A{e} fG ;


                                      17
      out
(iv) θG   sends standard AH                       H
                          G -modules to standard BG -modules;

                                                                       G ⋆
 (v) as objects in X, the proper costandard BH                   H
                                                G -modules are ∆{e} (ww0 ) ,
                   H
     where w ∈ W{e}  is a shortest representative of some coset from W/G;

(vi) as objects in X, the tilting BH               H                   H
                                   G -modules are T{e} (w), where w ∈ W{e} is
     a shortest representative of some coset from W/G.
                                                         out
Proof. (iii) follows from [Au, Section 5]. The functor θG     is exact and sends
indecomposable projectives to indecomposable projectives (see the proof of
                                        H                    out
Lemma 4.1). From the definition of fG      it follows that θG    sends
                                                                      indecom-
          H                                                   H    H
posable AG -projectives to objects of the category add A{e} fG . This im-
                out
plies that θH       maps AH G −mod to X, in particular, the images of standard
  H
AG -modules belong to X. Furthermore, every indecomposable projective
BHG -module has a filtration, whose subquotients are the images of standard
                                                      out
AG -modules, since AH
  H
                         G is quasi-hereditary and θG is exact. The existence of
the duality for BH   G is proved in the same way as [MS2, Proposition 2.6]. This
proves (ii) and (iv).
      out
     θG    sends tilting modules to tilting modules. Hence (vi) follows by track-
ing the highest weights.
                                         ⋆
     Let w be as in (v). Then ∆H                               H
                                    G (w) is the costandard AG -module. It is easy
                  out H     ⋆                                                   G ⋆
to see that θG ∆G (w) surjects onto the dual Verma module ∆H             {e} (ww0 ) ,
and that the kernel of this surjection is generated by a projective module
                                                     on                 G ⋆
from X. Now (v) follows from the fact that θG            sends ∆H{e} (ww0 ) back to
          ⋆
∆HG (w) .
                                                      out
     We are left to prove (i). First we note that θG      induces a monomorphism
        H        H
from AG to BG .
     From [MS2, Theorem        6.1] we have that the center of A surjects onto
           out       G
EndA θG ∆G (w0 ) and that the later algebra is isomorphic to C(G). Note
                                                                       out
that ∆G (w) ⊂ ∆G (w0G ) for all w ∈ WG , which induces θG                  ∆G (w) ⊂
 out          G
θG ∆G (w0 ).
                                                             out
Lemma 6.1. Let w ∈ WG . Then the restriction from θG             ∆G (w0G ) to
 out
θG   ∆G (w) induces an isomorphism
                         out
                             ∆G (w0G ) ∼        out
                                                         
                 EndA θG                = EndA θG   ∆G (w) .

Proof. We start with the case w = w0 . We have LG (w0 ) ∼        = ∆G (w0 ) ⊂
       G            G
∆G (w0 ) and [∆G (w0 ) : LG (w0 )] = 1 by [Di, Section 7]. All top subquo-
                      out
tients of the module θG   ∆G (w0 ) are isomorphic to L(w0 ). Since L(w0 ) is
                           out                    out
not a subquotient of any θG    LG (w) other than θG   LG (w0 ), it follows that


                                         18
 out                                                    out
θG   ∆G (w0 ) is stable under all endomorphisms of θG       ∆G (w0G ). In particular,
the restriction map for endomorphism rings is well-defined.
                                                                          out
    Using the same arguments as in Lemma 4.1 one shows that θG                ∆G (w0 )
has simple top. The standard properties of the translation functors imply
  out
[θG   ∆G (w0 ) : L(w0 )] = |G|, which, together with (ii), implies the equality
               out                             out
dim EndAG (θG      ∆G (w0 )) = |G|. Since θG       ∆G (w0G ) has a Verma flag, its
socle consists of simple subquotients isomorphic to L(w0 ). The arguments
                                         out            out
of the previous paragraph imply [θG          ∆G (w0G )/θG   ∆G (w0 ) : L(w0 )] = 0,
which, in turn, implies that the restriction map for the endomorphism rings
in injective. Since both these endomorphism rings have the same dimension,
we derive that the restriction is in fact an isomorphism. This completes the
proof in the case w = w0 .
    In the general case it would suffice to show that the restriction from
 out               out
θG ∆G (w) to θG        ∆G (w0 ) induces an isomorphism between the endomor-
phism rings of these modules. However, the same arguments as above show
                     out
that dim EndAG (θG       ∆G (w)) = |G| and that the restriction map is injective.
The statement follows.
                                                        out
Lemma 6.2. Let w ∈ WG . Then the canonical surjection θG    ∆G (w) ։
 out H
θG ∆G (w) induces an isomorphism,
                        out
                            ∆G (w) ∼        out H
                                                    
                EndA θG             = EndA θG  ∆G (w) .

Proof. The arguments, analogous to those in the proof of Lemma 6.1, show
that both endomorphism rings have dimension |G| and that the induced map
is injective. The statement follows.
   From Lemma 6.1 and Lemma 6.2 it follows that
                 out H                out
                                          ∆G (w0G ) ∼
                                                  
          EndX θG   ∆G (w) = EndA θG                 = C(G),

for every w ∈ WG , moreover, that the center of A (which is C by [So1])
                         out H
surjects onto EndX θG       ∆G (w) .
    Since C is symmetric, the corresponding trace form defines a splitting
C(G) ֒→ C of the epimorphism C ։ C(G) constructed above. This allows
us to consider C(G) as a subalgebra of BH   G , which is central and surjects onto
all the endomorphism rings from the previous paragraph. The fact that BH         G
                                                      H
is properly stratified implies  that  all standard  B G -modules  are in  fact free
                  ∆G (w0G ) ∼
               out H
                            
over EndX θG                  = C(G) (with the free basis given by any basis
in the corresponding proper standard module). This, in particular, implies
that BHG is a free C(G)-module of rank dim AG .
                                                 H

    To complete the proof it is now enough to show that AH      G and C(G) gen-
erate BHG . We do  this using the induction  with respect  to the partial order on

                                         19
   H
WG   , which makes BH                                       H
                    G stratified, see (ii). Let x, y ∈ WG . By induction we
                                                     H
can consider a properly stratified quotient, B̃, of BG , for which x becomes a
maximal element. Let also Ã denote the corresponding quotient of AH  G . In this
case we have that the corresponding projective B̃-module P̃ (x) is standard.
Then the properly stratified structure guarantees that the trace of P̃ (x) in
the projective module
                   P̃ (y) is a direct sum of say k copies of P̃ (x). This
implies that HomB̃ P̃ (x), P̃ (y) is a free C(G)-module of rank k.
    Let P̃ Ã (x) and P̃ Ã (y) denote the indecomposable projective Ã-modules,
                                                                 out
which correspond to x and y respectively. Recall that θG             sends indecom-
posable projective AG -modules to indecomposable projective BH
                       H
                                                                      G -modules (re-
alized as objects of X) preserving the standard filtration, and induces a bi-
jection on the isomorphism classes of simple modules, compatible with the
partial orders on these sets involved in the quasi-hereditary and properly
stratified structures respectively. This implies that
                                                          
                             dim HomÃ P̃ Ã (x), P̃ Ã (y) = k,
                                           
which shows that HomB̃ P̃ (x), P̃ (y) is generated by AH         G and C(G). For
reversed x and y the necessary statement follows applying ⋆. This proves the
ungraded version of (i) and the graded version follows from the remark that
all the above arguments are compatible with the grading. This completes
the proof.
Remark 6.1. It follows immediately from the proof of Theorem 6.1 that
both standard and proper standard BH    G -modules are gradeable, in particular,
it follows that BH
                 G is graded properly stratified in the sense of [MS1, Section 8].


7     Beilinson-Ginzburg-Soergel’s Theorem and
      Backelin’s Theorem
Theorem 7.1. ([BGS, Theorem 1.1.3]) Let G be a parabolic subgroup of W.
Then the algebras AG and AG
                          {e} are Koszul dual to each other.

Proof. Since the algebra C(G) lives in even degrees only, from Theorem 6.1(i)
it follows that                      !
                                  {e}
                                 BG      ∼
                                         = A!G .                        (10)
    Note again that A! ∼
                       = A by [So1, Theorem 18] and [BGS, Theorem 2.10.1].
Applying to the latter formula Proposition 3.1 and using the Ringel dual-
               !
ity gives B
            {e}
                   = AG , which, using (10), implies A! ∼
                   ∼                                    = AG . But from
             G          {e}                                  G      {e}


                                         20
Theorem 4.1 and Theorem 5.1 we know that both AG and AG      {e} are Koszul
with respect to the natural grading. The proof is now completed by applying
[BGS, Theorem 2.10.1].
Theorem 7.2. ([Ba, Theorem 1.1]) Let G and H be parabolic subgroups of
W. Then the algebras AH      G
                      G and Aw0 Hw0 are Koszul dual to each other.

Proof. Since the algebra C(w0 Hw0 ) lives in even degrees only, from Theo-
rem 6.1(i) it follows that
                                   !          !
                           BG         ∼  G
                            w0 Hw0    = Aw0 Hw0 .                     (11)
                                                                    !
    By Theorem 7.1 and [BGS, Theorem 2.10.1] we have AG                 ∼   {e}
                                                                        = AG .
                                                                 {e}
Applying to the latter formula Proposition 3.1 and using the Ringel duality
              !                                           !
gives BG         ∼
                 = AH                               G         ∼
                                                              = AH
       w0 Hw0       G , which, using (11), implies Aw0 Hw0        G . But from
                                     H        G
Theorem 5.1 we know that both AG and Aw0 Hw0 are Koszul with respect
to the natural grading. The proof is now completed by applying [BGS,
Theorem 2.10.1].


8    The category of linear complexes of tilting
     modules for the category O (p, Λ)
                                                        H
Let G and H be two parabolic subgroups of W. Let VG       denote the set of all
w ∈ WG which are at the same time longest coset representatives for cosets
                    H
from H \W. Let qG     be the sum of all primitive idempotents in AG , which
                       H
correspond to w ∈ VG     . Set CH       H    H                  H
                                G = qG AG qG . The algebra CG is the basic
associative algebra of the G-singular block of the category O(p, Λ), studied
in [FKM, MS2], where p is the parabolic subalgebra of g, associated with H.
The algebra CH G is properly stratified and has a duality. Abusing notation
we denote in this section the standard CH                               H
                                          G -modules by ∆(w), w ∈ VG . The
                                                            H
proper standard modules will be denoted by ∆(w), w ∈ VG       .
    Let now gH be the sum of all primitive idempotents in AG
              G
                                                                {e} , which cor-
respond to all w ∈ W such that w is the shortest coset representative for a
coset from G\W and w is the shortest coset    representative
                                                            for a coset from
                               G      G      G       G G
W/H at the same time. Set DH = A{e} / A{e} (1 − gH )A{e} .
   CH                                   G                             G
    G inherits a Z-grading from AG and DH inherits a Z-grading from A{e} .
We will call these gradings natural.
                                                            !
Proposition 8.1. There is an isomorphism of algebras, CH       ∼
                                                               = DG
                                                          G       w0 Hw0 ,
compatible with the natural gradings.

                                      21
Proof. This follows immediately from Proposition 3.1 and Theorem 7.1.
                                     !
   In particular, we obtain that C{e} ∼
                                    H         {e}
                                         = Dw0 Hw0 is an analogue of the
algebra Aw  0 Hw0
           {e}    but with respect to the representatives in W for cosets on
the different side. The algebra CH G has both tilting and cotilting modules,
associated with the properly stratified structure. Via [MS2, Section 8] the
natural grading on projective CHG -modules induces natural graded lifts of sim-
ple, injective, standard, proper standard, costandard and proper costandard
modules. Following [MO, Section 5], this allows us to fix a graded lift of
the tilting module T (x) such that the natural inclusion ∆(x) ֒→ T (x) is a
homogeneous map of degree 0. Further, we fix the graded lift of the cotilting
module C(x) such that the natural projection C(x) ։ ∇(x) is a homoge-
neous map of degree 0. Note that T (x) ∼ = C(x)h−2l(w0H )i.
Theorem 8.1.      (i) All standard CH
                                    {e} -modules admit linear tilting coresolu-
    tions.

 (ii) All costandard CH
                      {e} -modules admit linear cotilting resolutions.

Proof. Because of the duality it is enough to prove (i). In this case we have
∆(w0 ) = T (w0 ) for which the statement is trivial. Now the statement follows
by applying induction on the length of w and using translation functors, and
the same arguments as in the proof of Proposition 2.3.

Remark 8.1. One can also prove Theorem 8.1 generalizing the arguments
of Proposition 4.1. The main difference is that one will be forced to write
an analogue of the parabolically induced BGG-resolution for cosets G/H.
However, since this resolution consists only of modules with the scalar action
of the center of g, the existence of such resolution follows directly from the
proof of Proposition 4.1 using the functor η from [MS2, Section 3].

    We believe that the statement of Theorem 8.1 remains valid for singular
blocks (that is for all CH
                         G ) as well. However, the translation functor approach
does not work appropriately for singular blocks, and a proper generalization
of the corresponding arguments of Theorem 4.1 seems to be technically very
complicated.

Corollary 8.1.     (i) All standard CH
                                     {e} -modules admit linear projective res-
    olutions.

 (ii) All costandard CH
                      {e} -modules admit linear injective coresolutions.




                                      22
Proof. This follows from Theorem 8.1 and the Ringel self-duality of CH
                                                                     {e} , see
[FKM, Theorem 3].
                             H
Corollary 8.2. Let x, y ∈ V{e} and x > y. Then

                       extkCH ∆(x)hmi, ∆(y) 6= 0
                                            
                                      {e}


implies m +   2l(w0H)≤ k ≤ l(x) − l(y). In particular,
               ExtkCH ∆(x), ∆(y) = ExtkCH (∆(x), ∆(y)) = 0
                                  
                      {e}                                {e}


for all k ≥ l(x) − l(y).
Proof. Since all tilting CH
                          {e} -modules are cotilting at the same time, see for ex-
ample [FKM, Section 6], the tilting coresolution T • (∆(y)) of ∆(y) is cotilting
(up to a shift of grading) at the same time. But this means that
            extkCH ∆(x)hmi, ∆(y) = Hom(∆(x)hli• , T • (∆(y))),
                                     
                {e}


where the last homspace is taken in the homotopy category of the category
CH
 {e} −grmod. Now the first statement follows from Theorem 8.1(i), Propo-
sition 2.2, and the above remark that T (x) ∼
                                            = C(x)h−2l(w0G )i. The second
statement follows from the first one.
                           H
Corollary 8.3. Let x, y ∈ V{e} and x > y. Then
                                        l(x)−l(y)
                                    ExtCH           (∆(x), ∆(y))
                                            {e}


is a free EndCH
              {e}
                  (∆(x))-module of rank
                         l(x)−l(y)
                                      ∆(x)hl(x) − l(y) − 2l(w0H)i, ∆(y) .
                                                                       
              dim extCH
                            {e}


Proof. As in Corollary 8.2 we have that
                  l(x)−l(y)
              ExtCH               (∆(x), ∆(y)) = Hom(∆(x)• , T • (∆(y))),
                   {e}


where the last homspace is taken in the homotopy category of the category
CH                                              H
 {e} −mod. Note that all (graded) standard C{e} -modules have a graded fil-
tration by proper standard CH {e} -modules, see [MS2, Section 8], and further
observe that
                    l(x)−l(y)
                              ∆(x)hl(x) − l(y) − 2l(w0H)i, ∆(y)
                                                                
             dim extCH
                            {e}


is the number of occurrences of T (x)hl(x) − l(y)i in T l(x)−l(y) (∆(y)). Further,
HomCH {e}
          (∆(x), T (x)) ∼
                        = HomCH
                              {e}
                                  (∆(x), ∆(x)), which is a free EndCH   {e}
                                                                            (∆(x))-
module of rank one. The statement follows.

                                                    23
   Though DH G is not quasi-hereditary in general (a counter example can
be derived from [MS1, Remark 1.2]), the notion of a standard module is
nevertheless well-defined for this algebra (and for any algebra with a fixed
order on the set of the isomorphism classes of simple modules).

Corollary 8.4. Under the equivalence provided by Proposition 8.1, the linear
                                                              {e}
tilting coresolutions of standard CH
                                   {e} -modules are standard Dw0 Hw0 -modules;
and (appropriately shifted) linear cotilting resolutions of costandard CH {e} -
                           {e}
modules are costandard Dw0 Hw0 -modules.

Proof. The proof is analogous to that of [MO, Proposition 5].

Remark 8.2. All standard CH     {e} -modules are quotients of Verma modules in
O and hence have central character. Applying the equivalence η from [MS2,
Section 3], we obtain that the multiplicities of simple modules in the compo-
sition series of standard CH
                           {e} -modules coincide with the multiplicities of the
corresponding (under η) simple AH    {e} -modules in the composition series of the
corresponding (again under η) standard AH     {e} -modules. Moreover, everything
is compatible with the grading. Therefore, the components of the linear tilting
coresolution of a standard CH{e} -modules can be computed using the Kazhdan-
Lusztig combinatorics (see also [CC]).


                                 Acknowledgments

    The research was partially supported by the Swedish Research Council,
the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, the Swedish Foundation for Interna-
tional Cooperation in Research and Higher Education (STINT), and by the
Faculty of Natural Sciences, Uppsala University. I would like to thank Yuriy
Drozd and Ryszard Rubinsztein for helpful and stimulating discussions. I
am especially grateful to Catharina Stroppel for many helpful discussions,
suggestions and corrections to the preliminary version of the paper.


References
[Au]    M. Auslander, Representation theory of Artin algebras. I, II. Comm.
        Algebra 1 (1974), 177–268; ibid. 1 (1974), 269–310.

[ADL] I. Ágoston, V. Dlab, E. Lukács, Quasi-hereditary extension algebras.
      Algebr. Represent. Theory 6 (2003), no. 1, 97–117.


                                       24
[Ba]    E. Backelin, Koszul duality for parabolic and singular category O.
        Represent. Theory 3 (1999), 139–152 (electronic).

[BB]    A. Beilinson, J. Bernstein, Localisation de g-modules. (French) C.
        R. Acad. Sci. Paris Sr. I Math. 292 (1981), no. 1, 15–18.

[BGS] A. Beilinson, V. Ginzburg, W. Soergel, Koszul duality patterns in
      representation theory. J. Amer. Math. Soc. 9 (1996), no. 2, 473–527.

[BG]    I. N. Bernstein, S. I. Gelfand, Tensor products of finite- and infinite-
        dimensional representations of semisimple Lie algebras. Compositio
        Math. 41 (1980), no. 2, 245–285.

[BGG] I. N. Bernstein, I. M. Gelfand, S. I. Gelfand, A certain category of
      g-modules. (Russian) Funkcional. Anal. i Prilozen. 10 (1976), no. 2,
      1–8.

[BK]    J.-L. Brylinski, M. Kashiwara, Kazhdan-Lusztig conjecture and
        holonomic systems. Invent. Math. 64 (1981), no. 3, 387–410.

[CC]    L. Casian, D. Collingwood, The Kazhdan-Lusztig conjecture for gen-
        eralized Verma modules. Math. Z. 195 (1987), no. 4, 581–600.

[CPS]   E. Cline, B. Parshall, L. Scott, Finite-dimensional algebras and high-
        est weight categories. J. Reine Angew. Math. 391 (1988), 85–99.

[Di]    J. Dixmier, Enveloping algebras. Graduate Studies in Mathematics,
        11. American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 1996.

[Dl]    V. Dlab, Properly stratified algebras. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris Sér. I
        Math. 331 (2000), no. 3, 191–196.

[DR]    V. Dlab, C. M. Ringel, Quasi-hereditary algebras. Illinois J. Math.
        33 (1989), no. 2, 280–291.

[FKM] V. Futorny, S. König, V.Mazorchuk, S-subcategories in O. Manus-
      cripta Math. 102 (2000), no. 4, 487–503.

[Hi]    H. Hiller, Geometry of Coxeter groups. Research Notes in Mathe-
        matics, 54. Pitman, Boston, Mass.-London, 1982

[Ja]    J. C. Jantzen, Einhüllende Algebren halbeinfacher Lie-Algebren.
        Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete (3), Springer-
        Verlag, Berlin, 1983.


                                      25
[Ir]    R. S. Irving, A filtered category O S and applications. Mem. Amer.
        Math. Soc. 83 (1990), no. 419,

[KL]    D. Kazhdan, G. Lusztig, Representations of Coxeter groups and
        Hecke algebras. Invent. Math. 53 (1979), no. 2, 165–184.

[KSX] S. König, I. Slungård, C. Xi, Double centralizer properties, dominant
      dimension, and tilting modules. J. Algebra 240 (2001), no. 1, 393–
      412.

[MaSa] R. Martinez Villa, M. Saorin, Koszul equivalences and dualities.
       Pacific J. Math. 214 (2004), no. 2, 359–378.

[MO]    V. Mazorchuk, S. Ovsienko, A pairing in homology and the category
        of linear tilting complexes for a quasi-hereditary algebra, Preprint
        2004:29, Uppsala University. With an appendix written by C. Strop-
        pel

[MS1]   V. Mazorchuk, C. Stroppel, On functors associated to a simple root,
        Preprint math.RT/0410339.

[MS2]   V. Mazorchuk, C. Stroppel, Translation and shuffling of projectively
        presentable modules and a categorification of a parabolic Hecke mod-
        ule, Preprint 2003:07, Leicester University, to appear in Trans. AMS.

[Ri]    C. M. Ringel, The category of modules with good filtrations over
        a quasi-hereditary algebra has almost split sequences. Math. Z. 208
        (1991), no. 2, 209–223.

[RC]    A. Rocha-Caridi, Splitting criteria for g-modules induced from a
        parabolic and the Bernstein-Gelfand-Gelfand resolution of a finite-
        dimensional, irreducible g-module. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 262
        (1980), no. 2, 335–366.

[So1]   W. Soergel, Kategorie O, perverse Garben und Moduln über den
        Koinvarianten zur Weylgruppe. (German) J. Amer. Math. Soc. 3
        (1990), no. 2, 421–445.

[So2]   W. Soergel, Charakterformeln für Kipp-Moduln über Kac-Moody-
        Algebren. (German) Represent. Theory 1 (1997), 115–132

[St]    C. Stroppel, Category O: Gradings and translation functors. J. Al-
        gebra 268 (2003), no. 1, 301–326.



                                     26
[Vo]   D. Vogan, Irreducible characters of semisimple Lie groups. II. The
       Kazhdan-Lusztig conjectures. Duke Math. J. 46 (1979), no. 4, 805–
       859.

[Zh]   B. Zhu, On characteristic modules of graded quasi-hereditary alge-
       bras, Comm. Alg. 32 (2004), 2919-2928.


Volodymyr Mazorchuk, Department of Mathematics, Uppsala University,
Box 480, 751 06, Uppsala, Sweden, e-mail: mazor@math.uu.se,
web: “http://www.math.uu.se/˜mazor/”.




                                  27
