                                                                             CORRECTION TO
                                                         “MEASURABLE QUOTIENTS OF UNIPOTENT TRANSLATIONS
                                                                       ON HOMOGENEOUS SPACES”
                                                                  [Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 345 (1994) 577–594]
arXiv:math/9607220v1 [math.RT] 1 Jul 1996




                                                                                                   DAVE WITTE


                                                    Abstract. The statements of Main Theorem 1.1 and Theorem 2.1 of the author’s paper [Trans. Amer.
                                                    Math. Soc. 345 (1994) 577–594] should assume that Γ is discrete and G is connected. (Cors. 1.3, 5.6, and 5.8
                                                    are affected similarly.) These restrictions can be removed if the conclusions of the results are weakened to
                                                    allow for the possible existence of transitive, proper subgroups of G. In this form, the results can be extended
                                                    to the setting where G is a product of real and p-adic Lie groups.



                                              There are two errors in the proof of Theorem 2.1 of [W]. To eliminate these mistakes,
                                                 the statements of Theorem 2.1 and Main Theorem 1.1 should assume that Γ is discrete and G is
                                                 connected.
                                            A few other results are affected: In Cor. 1.3, assume Γ is discrete and U is connected. In Cor. 5.6, assume
                                            Λ is discrete. In Cor. 5.8, assume Λ is discrete and N is connected.
                                               Although it includes the main cases of interest, the restriction to connected groups and discrete subgroups
                                            is not entirely satisfying. For more general Lie groups, however, there are two problems in the proof: (1) it
                                            was tacitly assumed that Aff(Λ\G) is second countable, but this may not be the case if G/G◦ is not finitely
                                            generated; and (2) some proper subgroups of G may be transitive on Γ\G, so X may not project onto all of G
                                            in Step 1 on p. 582. The first mistake can be eliminated by using the topology of convergence in measure.
                                            The second problem can be eliminated by hypothesis (as above), but it can be better resolved by weakening
                                            the conclusion to account for the transitive proper subgroups (see Cor. A.2 below).
                                               The improved argument that eliminates Problem (1) applies to any locally compact group, not just Lie
                                            groups (see A.1). Because M. Ratner’s Classification of Invariant Measures (1.2) is now known to be true
                                            not just for Lie groups, but also for direct products of real and p-adic Lie groups [MT], [R], this allows us to
                                            extend Main Theorem 1.1 to this more general setting (see A.3).
                                               Before stating our results, let us present a simplified definition of central double-coset quotients. The
                                            original definition imposed a more complicated restriction on K, because the author did not realize that
                                            noncompact groups are unnecessary (when Γ\G has finite volume).

                                            Definition (cf. [W, p. 578]). Let U be a subgroup of a locally compact group G, and let Γ\G be a finite-
                                            volume homogeneous space of G. Suppose
                                              1. Λ is a closed subgroup of G containing Γ; and
                                              2. K is a compact subgroup of Aff(Λ\G) that centralizes U .
                                            Then the natural U -action on Λ\G/K is a quotient of the U -action on Γ\G. It is called a central double-coset
                                            quotient.
                                               We should point out that the topology on Aff(Λ\G) here is the topology of convergence in measure. The
                                            more natural topology of uniform convergence on compact sets may be used instead if Aff(Λ\G) is second
                                            countable and locally compact in this topology. Unfortunately, this is not always the case, although it is
                                            true if G is a Lie group whose component group G/G◦ is finitely generated.

                                              We also present a naive analogue, for non-Lie groups, of the notion of Lie subgroup of a Lie group.

                                              Date: January 12, 2018.
                                              1991 Mathematics Subject Classification. Primary 22E40, 28C10, 58F11; Secondary 22D40, 22E35, 28D15.
                                              Submitted to the Transactions of the American Mathematical Society in June 1996.
                                                                                                           1
2                                                DAVE WITTE


Definition. Let us say that a subgroup H of a locally compact group G is semi-closed if, for some n, there
is a closed subgroup X of Gn = G × G × · · · × G, such that H is the projection of X into the first factor of
Gn .

Theorem A.1. Let U be a subgroup of a locally compact, second countable group G, and let Γ\G be a
finite-volume homogeneous space of G, such that every semi-closed subgroup of G that contains U , and is
transitive on Γ\G, is open. Assume that the U -action on Γ\G is ergodic, and that every ergodic invariant
probability measure for the diagonal U -action on (Γ\G) × (Γ\G) is homogeneous for a subgroup of G × G.
Then each quotient of the U -action on Γ\G is isomorphic to a central double-coset quotient of (Γ ∩ H)\H,
for some open subgroup H of G that contains U , and is transitive on Γ\G.
   If G is a Lie group, then, by replacing it with a Lie subgroup of the smallest dimension among those
with the property that they are transitive and contain U , we can arrange for the theorem’s hypothesis on
semi-closed subgroups to be fulfilled. Then, by combining the theorem with Ratner’s Theorem (1.2), we
obtain the following version of Main Theorem 1.1 that does not assume Γ is discrete or that G is connected,
but has a weaker conclusion.
Corollary A.2. Let U be a nilpotent, unipotent subgroup of a Lie group G, and let Γ\G be a finite-volume
homogeneous space of G. If the U -action on Γ\G is ergodic, then each quotient of the U -action on Γ\G is
isomorphic to a central double-coset quotient of (Γ ∩ H)\H, for some Lie subgroup H of G that contains U ,
and is transitive on Γ\G.
   If G is a direct product of real Lie groups and p-adic Lie groups (for different p’s), then any closed
subgroup of G contains an open, normal subgroup that is a product of closed subgroups of the factors of G
[R, Prop. 1.5, p. 289]. Thus, the dimension of any closed subgroup (or of any semi-closed subgroup of any
semi-closed subgroup of . . . of G) can be defined as the sum of the dimensions of its intersections with
the direct factors of G. Thus, by replacing G with an appropriate subgroup of minimal dimension, we can
again arrange for the theorem’s hypothesis on semi-closed subgroups to be fulfilled. So, because Ratner’s
Theorem has been generalized to (many) groups of this type [MT], [R], we obtain the following classification
of quotients for homogeneous spaces of these product groups. (See [R, p. 276] for the definition of regular ;
every algebraic group is regular.)
Corollary A.3. Let S be a finite set of places of Q and, for each p ∈ S, let Gp be a regular Lie group
over Qp (where Qp = R if p = ∞). Let G be a closed subgroup of the direct product ×p∈S Gp . Let U be a
subgroup of G that is generated by one-parameter Ad-unipotent subgroups of ×p∈S Gp , and let Γ be a lattice
in G. If the U -action on Γ\G is ergodic, then each quotient of the U -action on Γ\G is isomorphic to a
central double-coset quotient of (Γ ∩ H)\H, for some semi-closed subgroup H of G that contains U , and is
transitive on Γ\G.

Definition. Let Γ\G be a homogeneous space of a locally compact group G, and let A, B ⊂ G. We say
that a Borel function φ : Γ\G → Γ\G is affine for A via B if, for each a ∈ A, there is some b ∈ B, such that
φ(xa) = φ(x)b for all x ∈ Γ\G. Note that if the subgroup Γ contains no nontrivial, normal subgroup of G,
then the element b is unique, for a given a ∈ A. Furthermore, if φ is affine for G (via G), then φ is an affine
map.
Proof of Thm. A.1. Follow the proof of Thm. 2.1 (with “locally compact” in the place of “Lie”) until the
definition of L, which is a displayed equation on p. 582. (There is a typographical error at the start of line 9
on p. 582: (S, ν) should be (T, ν).)
   From the proof of Step 1 (on p. 582), and using the hypothesis on semi-closed subgroups of G, we see
that, for a.e. (Γs, Γt) ∈ M , there is a closed subgroup X of G × G such that (1) for almost every x ∈ X,
we have (Γs, Γt) · x ∈ M , (2) the subgroup X projects onto an open subgroup of each of the two factors
of G × G, and (3) the subgroup X contains U .
   Let C(X ) be the semi-group of measure-preserving Borel maps from Λ\G to Λ\G that commute a.e. with
the action of each u ∈ U , where two such maps are identified if they agree a.e. [JR, p. 532]. From the proofs
of Steps 2 and 3, we see that a.e. ergodic component of the projection of ρ to Λ\G × Λ\G is supported on the
graph of some φ ∈ C(X ). (Furthermore, φ is affine for some open subgroup of G, via G.) Then a theorem of
Veech [JR, Thm. 1.8.2] states that there is a compact subgroup K of C(X ), such that the original quotient
                           CORRECTION TO ‘QUOTIENTS OF UNIPOTENT TRANSLATIONS’                                          3


(T, ν) is isomorphic to Λ\G/K (and, furthermore, we know that a.e. φ ∈ K is affine for some open subgroup
of G, via G). Thus, all that remains is to show that there is some open subgroup H of G, such that K is
affine for H via H, for this implies that K is a group of affine maps on (Γ ∩ H)\H.
   First, note that it suffices to show that K is affine for some open subgroup of G. For, if this is the case,
we may let
                                        H = {a ∈ G | K is affine for a}.
For any φ ∈ K and a ∈ H, we know that φ is affine for a via some b ∈ G. For any ψ ∈ K, because the
composition ψφ is affine for a, we see that ψ is affine for b. Since ψ is arbitrary, this implies b ∈ H. So φ is
affine for a via H, as desired.
   Second, note that if two maps are each affine for (perhaps different) open subgroups of G (via G), then
their composition is also affine for an open subgroup of G (via G). Thus, because K has no proper conull
subgroups, we conclude that each φ ∈ K is affine for some open subgroup of G. The problem is to find a
single open subgroup of G that works uniformly for all φ ∈ K.
   Let A1 ⊃ A2 ⊃ · · · be a chain of compact neighborhoods of e in G, whose intersection is {e}, and let
B1 ⊂ B2 ⊂ · · · be a chain of compact sets whose interiors exhaust G. For each N ∈ Z+ , define
                              KN = {φ ∈ K | φ and φ−1 are affine for AN via BN }.
We claim that KN is closed. Suppose φn → φ ∈ K. Given a ∈ AN , each φn is affine for a via some bn ∈ BN .
Because BN is compact, we may assume {bn } converges, to some b ∈ B. Then
                       φ(sa) ← φn (sa) = φn (s)bn → φ(s)b           (convergence in measure).
So φ is affine for a via b. The same argument applies to φ−1 , so φ ∈ K, as desired.
   Because every open subset of G contains some An , we know that each φ ∈ K is affine for some An (via G).
Then the compactness of An implies that φ is affine for An via some Bm . Therefore, φ ∈ Kmax(m,n) . Hence,
the Baire Category Theorem implies there is some N1 , such that KN1 has nonempty interior. Let C = KN1 ;
the compactness of K (and the fact that C −1 = C) implies there is some r ∈ Z+ , such that C r is an open
subgroup of K. This implies that K/C r is finite. Thus, by enlarging N1 , we may assume that KN1 contains
coset representatives of K/C r . Hence, C r = K.
   By modding out the largest normal subgroup of G that is contained in Λ, let us assume, for simplicity,
that Λ contains no nontrivial, normal subgroup of G. Then, for any φ ∈ C and a ∈ AN1 , there is a unique
b(φ, a) ∈ BN1 , such that φ is affine for a via b. We claim that the map b : C × AN1 → BN1 is continuous.
Suppose φn → φ and an → a, and let b = b(φ, a). Assume bn = b(φn , an ) converges, say to b′ ∈ BN1 . We
have
                 φ(s)b = φ(sa) ← φn (san ) = φn (s)bn → φ(s)b′     (convergence in measure).
     ′
So b = b, as desired.
   From the conclusion of the preceding paragraph, and the compactness of C, we see that there is some N2 ,
such that C is affine for AN2 via AN1 . Continuing, we recursively construct a sequence {Ni }, such that C is
affine for ANi via ANi−1 . By composition, then K = C r is affine for ANr (via BN1 ).

Acknowledgment. I am pleased to thank Marina Ratner, for encouraging me to extend my work, and
César Silva, for several helpful conversations. This research was partially supported by a grant from the
National Science Foundation.

                                                     References
[JR] A. del Junco and D. Rudolph, On ergodic actions whose self-joinings are graphs, Ergodic Theory Dynamical Systems 7
     (1987) 531–557.
[MT] G. A. Margulis and G. M. Tomanov, Invariant measures for actions of unipotent groups over local fields on homogeneous
     spaces, Invent. Math. 116 (1994) 347–392.
[R]  M. Ratner, Raghunathan’s conjectures for cartesian products of real and p-adic Lie groups, Duke Math. J. 77 (1995)
     275–382.
[W] Dave Witte, Measurable quotients of unipotent translations on homogeneous spaces, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 345 (1994)
     577–594.

   Department of Mathematics, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, OK 74078
   E-mail address: dwitte@math.okstate.edu
