                                           Groupoids: Unifying Internal and
                                                External Symmetry
arXiv:math.RT/9602220 4 Feb 1996




                                                          A Tour Through Some Examples
                                                                  Alan Weinstein
                                                             Department of Mathematics
                                                               University of California
                                                              Berkeley, CA 94720 USA
                                                                (alanw@math.berkeley.edu)
                                                                    January 23, 1996


                                   1 Introduction
                                   Mathematicians tend to think of the notion of symmetry as being virtually
                                   synonymous with the theory of groups and their actions, perhaps largely
                                   because of the well known Erlanger program F. Klein and the related work
                                   of S. Lie, which virtually dened geometric structures by their groups of au-
                                   tomorphisms. (See, for example, Yaglom's account in [21].) In fact, though
                                   groups are indeed sucient to characterize homogeneous structures, there
                                   are plenty of objects which exhibit what we clearly recognize as symmetry,
                                   but which admit few or no nontrivial automorphisms. It turns out that the
                                   symmetry, and hence much of the structure, of such objects can be charac-
                                   terized algebraically if we use groupoids and not just groups.
                                       Research partially supported by NSF Grant DMS-93-09653. This article is based on
                                   a talk given rst at UCB (the University of California at Berkeley) in April 1995, during
                                   Mathematics Awareness Week, the theme of which was Mathematics and Symmetry. I
                                   would like to thank the Department of Mathematics of another UCB (the University of
                                   Colorado at Boulder) for an invitation to Boulder in November 1995, where a similar talk
                                   was most recently given, and where the rst draft of this manuscript was largely written
                                   in the downtown cafes. Thanks should also be given to a third UCB (Universite Claude-
                                   Bernard, Lyon), where I started my intensive work on groupoids in the summer of 1986.
                                   Finally, I would like to thank Paul Brown for preparing the gures.

                                                                              1
   The aim of this paper is to explain, mostly through examples, what
groupoids are and how they describe symmetry. We will begin with ele-
mentary examples, with discrete symmetry, and end with examples in the
dierentiable setting which involve Lie groupoids and their corresponding
innitesimal objects, Lie algebroids.
1.1 Some history
The following historical remarks are not intended to be complete but merely
to indicate the breadth of areas where groupoids have been used. An ex-
tensive survey of groupoids as of 1986 can be found in R. Brown's article
[2].
     Groupoids were introduced (and named) by H. Brandt [1] in a 1926 paper
on the composition of quadratic forms in four variables. C. Ehresmann [5]
added further structures (topological and dierentiable as well as algebraic)
to groupoids, thereby introducing them as a tool in dierentiable topology
and geometry.
     In algebraic geometry, A. Grothendieck used groupoids extensively and,
in particular, showed how they could be used to tame the unruly equivalence
relations which arise in the construction of moduli spaces. As the role of
moduli spaces expands in physics as well as mathematics, groupoids continue
to play an essential role.
     In analysis, G. Mackey [11] used groupoids under the name of virtual
groups to allow the treatment of ergodic actions of groups, \as if" they were
transitive, while it was observed that the convolution operation, extended
from groups to groupoids, made possible the construction of a multitude
of interesting noncommutative algebras. (See [16] for a survey.) In this
context, the use of groupoid convolution algebras as a substitute for the
algebras of functions on badly behaved quotient spaces is a central theme
in the noncommutative geometry of A. Connes [4]. The book just cited also
shows the extent to which groupoids provide a framework for a unied study
of operator algebras, foliations, and index theory.
     In algebraic topology, the fundamental groupoid of a topological space
has been exploited by P. Higgins, R. Brown, and others (see Brown's text-
book [3]) where the use of a xed base point as imposed by the usual
fundamental group would be too restrictive. Groupoid methods are thus
well adapted to disconnected spaces (which arise frequently when connected
spaces are cut into pieces for study) and to spaces with xed-point-free group

                                      2
                                      :::
:::                                                                         :::




                                      :::


             Figure 1: Tiling of the plane by 2  1 rectangles.

actions.
    The extension of Lie theory from dierentiable groups to groupoids was
carried out for the most part by J. Pradines, as described in a series of notes
ending with [15]. An exposition of this work, together with a detailed study
of the role of groupoids and Lie algebroids in dierential geometry, can be
found in the book of K. Mackenzie [8].
    Finally, the author's own interest in groupoids arose from the discovery
[18][19], made independently at around the same time by Karasev [6] and
Zakrzewski [22], that a groupoid with compatible symplectic structure is
the appropriate geometric model for a family of noncommutative algebras
obtained by deformation from the algebra of functions on a manifold with
a Poisson bracket structure.

2 Global and local symmetry groupoids
We begin our exposition with a simple example which will lead to the de-
nition of a groupoid. Consider a tiling of the euclidean plane R2 by identical
2  1 rectangles, specied by the set X (idealized as 1-dimensional) where the
grout between the tiles lies: X = H [ V , where H = R  Zand V = 2Z R:
(See Figure 1.) We will call each connected component of R2 n X a tile.
    The symmetry of this tiling is traditionally described by the group
consisting of those rigid motions of R2 which leave X invariant. It consists

                                       3
of the normal subgroup of translations by elements of the lattice  = H \V =
2Z Z(corresponding to corner points of the tiles), together with reections
through each of the points in 12  = Z 21 Z and across the horizontal and
vertical lines through those points.
    Now consider what is lost when we pass from X to .
        The same symmetry group would arise if we had replaced X by the
         lattice  of corner points, even though  looks quite dierent from X .
         (Of course, there are reasons why this loss of detail in passing from X
         to is welcome, as is the case for many mathematical abstractions,
         but read on.)
        The group retains no information about the local structure of the
         tiled plane, such as the fact that neighborhoods of all the points inside
         the tiles look identical if the tiles are uniform, while they may look
         dierent if the tiles are painted with a design (which could still be
         invariant under ).
        If, as is the case on real bathroom oors, the tiling is restricted to a
         nite part of the plane, such as B = [0; 2m][0; n]; the symmetry group
         shrinks drastically. The subgroup of leaving X \ B invariant contains
         just 4 elements, even though a repetitive pattern on the bathroom oor
         is clearly visible.
    Our rst groupoid will enable us to describe the symmetry of the nite
tiled rectangle. We rst dene the transformation groupoid of the action of
   on R2 to be the set1
             G( ; R2) = f(x; ; y )jx 2 R2; y 2 R2;  2 ; and x = y g
with the binary operation
                            (x; ; y )(y; ; z ) = (x; ; z ):
This operation has the following properties.
   1. It is dened only for certain pairs of elements: gh is dened only
      when  (g ) = (h) for certain maps  and  from onto R2; here
       : (x; ; y ) 7! x and  : (x; ; y ) 7! y .
   1
    As a set, G( ; R2) is isomorphic to  R2, but we prefer the following more symmetric
description, which makes the composition law more transparent.

                                            4
                                      gh




                     g                                    h
(g) = (gh)                     ( g ) =  ( h)                   (h) =  (gh)

                     Figure 2: Multiplication in a groupoid.

   2. It is associative: if either of the products (gh)k or g (hk) is dened,
      then so is the other, and they are equal.
   3. For each g in G, there are left and right identity elements g and g
      such that g g = g = gg :
   4. Each g in G has an inverse g           1     for which gg 1 = g and g 1g = g :
    More generally, a groupoid with base B is a set B with mappings  and 
from G onto B and a binary operation (g; h) 7! gh satisfying the conditions
1-4 above. We may think of each element g of G as an arrow pointing from
(g ) to (g ) in B; arrows are multiplied by placing them head to tail, as in
Figure 2.
    Many properties of groupoids suggested by this picture are easily proven.
for instance, (g 1) =  (g ) (since gg 1 is dened), and (gh) = (g ) (since
(g g )h = g (gh) implies that g (gh) is dened). One also shows easily
that (g ) and g (or  (g ) and g ) determine one another, thus producing
a bijective mapping  from the base B to the subset G(0)  G consisting of
the identity elements. The reader familiar with categories will probably have
realized by now that a groupoid is just a category in which every morphism
has an inverse.2
    Now we return to our transformation groupoid G( ; R2) and form its
restriction to B = [0; 2m]  [0; n] (or any other subset B of R2) by dening
          G( ; R2)jB = fg 2 G( ; R2)j(g ) and (g ) belong to Bg:
The following concepts from groupoid theory, applied to this example, now
show that G( ; R2)jB indeed captures the symmetry which we see in the
tiled oor.
   2
     Actually, not quite. The elements of a category can constitute a class rather than a
set, so a groupoid is a small category with every morphism invertible.

                                                 5
                4     5

                          2                1
                          3




Figure 3: The point labeled by j belongs to the orbit Oj of the groupoid
G( ; R2)jB .

    An orbit of the groupoid G over B is an equivalence class for the
     relation
          x G y if and only if there is a groupoid element g with
          (g ) = x and (g ) = y .
     In the example, two points are in the same orbit if they are similarly
     placed within their tiles or within the grout pattern. (We are allowed
     to turn the tiles over, as well as to translate them or rotate them by
     180.)
    The isotropy group of x 2 B consists of those g in G with (g) =
     x = (g ): In the example, the isotropy group is trivial for every point
     except those in 12  \ B , for which it is Z2  Z2.
    We can describe local symmetries of our tiling by introducing another
groupoid. Consider the plane R2 as the disjoint union of P1 = B \ X (the
grout), P2 = B n P1 (the tiles), and P3 = R2 n B (the exterior of the tiled
room). Now dene the local symmetry groupoid Gloc as the set of triples
(x; ; y ) in B   B for which x = y , and for which y has a neighborhood
U in R2 such that  (U \ Pi)  Pi for i = 1; 2; 3: The composition is given
by the same formula as for G( ; R2):
    For this groupoid, there are only a nite number of orbits (see Figure
3).
    O1 = interior points of tiles
    O2 = interior edge points

                                     6
  6               5            5             5             5            6

  5               3            3             3             3            5

  5               3            3             3             3            5

  5               3            3             3             3            5

  6               5            5             5             5            6

          Figure 4: Orbit decomposition of the nite groupoid GlocjL .

      O3 = interior crossing points
      O4 = boundary edge points
      O5 = boundary \T" points
      O6 = boundary corner points
    The isotropy group of a point in O1 is now isomorphic to the entire
rotation group O(2); it is Z2  Z2 for O2 , the 8 element dihedral group D4
for O3 , and Z2 for O4, O5 , and O6 .
    Now we can create a completely nite object by restricting Gloc to the
nite set L = O3 [ O5 [ O6 of tile corner points. GlocjL now has just three
orbits, with isotropy groups isomorphic to D4 , Z2, and Z2 as before. (See
Figure 4.) At this point, we have something like the smile which remains
after the Cheshire Cat has disappeared. The set L has no structure at all
except for that provided by the groupoid GlocjL , which is a sort of relic
of the symmetry structure which was given by the original decomposition
into grout, tiles, and and exterior. We could say that the points of L have
\internal symmetry" specied by the isotropy groups of GlocjL , and that the
\types" of these points are classied by the orbit structure of the groupoid.
This internal symmetry and type classication can be viewed either as a
relic of the original tiling, or simply as a \geometric structure" on L.
    The situation here is similar to that in gauge theory, where the points of
space-time are equipped with internal symmetry groups whose representa-
tions correspond to physical particles. But gauge groups and gauge trans-
formations are applicable only because all the points of space time look
alike. To describe non-homogeneous structures like the tiled oor requires
groupoids rather than groups.3
  3
      Actually, groupoids are useful even in the realm of gauge theory. (See [9].)

                                              7
    A notable feature of the groupoid GlocjL is that it can be entirely de-
composed into its restrictions to the orbits O3 , O5 , and O6 . In other words,
the groupoid contains no information about the relation of the orbits to one
another. This situation is typical for discrete groupoids. Only the pres-
ence of a topology on a groupoid and its base can interfere with such a
decomposition.

3 Groupoids and equivalence relations
If B is any set, the product B  B is a groupoid over B with (x; y ) = x,
(x; y ) = y , and (x; y )(y; z) = (x; z). The identities are the (x; x), and
(x; y ) 1 = (y; x): We call this the pair groupoid of B .4 Note that a sub-
groupoid of B  B , i.e. a subset closed under product and inversion, and
containing all the identity elements,5 is nothing but an equivalence relation
on B . The orbits are the equivalence classes, and the isotropy subgroups
are all trivial.
    If G is any groupoid over B , the map (;  ) : G ! B  B is a morphism
from G to the pair groupoid of B . (We leave it to the reader to formulate
the precise denition of groupoid morphism.) The image of (;  ) is the
orbit equivalence relation G , and the kernel is the union of the isotropy
groups.
    The morphism (;  ) suggests another way of looking at groupoids. Until
now, we have been describing them as generalized groups, but now we want
to think of groupoids as generalized equivalence relations as well. From this
point of view, a groupoid over B tells us not only which elements of B are
equivalent to one another (or \isomorphic"), but it also parametrizes the
dierent ways (\isomorphisms") in which two elements can be equivalent.
This leads us to the following guiding principle of Grothendieck, Mackey,
Connes, Deligne, : : : .
       Almost every interesting equivalence relation on a space B arises
       in a natural way as the orbit equivalence relation of some group-
       oid G over B . Instead of dealing directly with the orbit space
       B=G as an object in the category Smap of sets and mappings, one
   4
     Other authors use the terms coarse groupoid or banal groupoid for this object.
   5
     One often omits this last condition from the denition of a subgroupoid. To emphasize
it, we can refer to a wide subgroupoid.


                                            8
     should consider instead the groupoid G itself as an object in the
     category Ghtp of groupoids and homotopy classes of morphisms.
   Here we will provide a denition. If
                                        fGi    - G0
                               G

                                             0  0
                              ??        fBi      ??
                               B               - B0
are morphisms of groupoids for i = 1; 2, a homotopy (or natural transforma-
tion in the language of categories) from f 1 to f 2 is a map h : B ! G0 with
the following properties.
    For each x 2 B, 0(h(x)) = fB1 (x) and 0(h(x)) = fB2 (x).
    For each g 2 G, h((g))fG2 (g) = fG1 (g)h((g)).
   An isomorphism in Ghtp between the groupoids G and G0 (sometimes
called an equivalence of groupoids) gives a bijection between the orbit spaces
B=G and B=G0, as well as group isomorphisms between corresponding iso-
tropy subgroups in G and G0 . In the absence of further structure on the
groupoids, an equivalence is essentially no more than this, but when the
groupoids (and their bases) have measurable, topological, dierentiable, al-
gebraic, or symplectic (and Poisson) structures, the quotient spaces can be
rather nasty objects, outside the category originally under consideration,
and it is essential to focus attention on the groupoids themselves. One tool
which makes this focus eective is an algebra associated to the groupoid G
over B which is a useful substitute for the space of functions on B=G when
the quotient is a \bad" space. We describe this algebra in the next section.

4 Groupoid algebras
The convolution of two complex valued functions on a group G is dened as
the sum
                        (a  b)(g ) =
                                        X a(k)b(k 1g);
                                        k 2G

                                         9
at least when the support of each function (i.e. the set where it is not zero)
is nite. When the supports are innite, the sum may still be dened if the
functions are absolutely summable. One obtains in this way, for instance,
the rules for multiplying Fourier series as functions on the additive group Z.
    To extend the denition of convolution from groups to groupoids, one re-
places the domain G of the sum (or integral) by the -bre Gg =  1 ((g )):
Alternatively, one may use the more symmetric formula for convolution:
                         (a  b)(g ) =
                                                X            a(k)b(`):
                                          f(k;`)jk`=gg
    For instance, if G = B  B is the pair groupoid over B = f1; 2; : : : ; ng,
the convolution operation (dened on all functions) is
                     (a  b)(i; j ) =
                                              X              a(i; k)b(i; j);
                                        (i;k)(k;j )=(i;j )
and if we write aij for a(i; j ) we get

                               (a  b)ij =
                                                Xa b
                                                   n
                                                       ik kj ;
                                                k=1
which exhibits F (f1; 2; : : : ; ng  f1; 2; : : : ; ng) as the algebra of n  n ma-
trices.
    This may look like a peculiar way of viewing the algebra of matrices,
but Connes ([4] pp. 33-39, and elsewhere) has made the point that it was
precisely as a groupoid algebra that Heisenberg constructed his original for-
mulation of quantum mechanics. (The elements of the groupoid were tran-
sitions between excited states of an atom. Only later were the elements of
the groupoid algebra identied as matrices.) The noncommutativity of the
algebra of observables in quantum mechanics is then seen to be a direct
consequence of the noncommutativity of the pair groupoid B  B , as com-
pared with the commutativity of the group Zunderlying the Fourier series
representation of oscillatory motion in classical mechanics.
    When G is a topological group(oid)6 it is natural to look at continuous
functions. Unless the -bres of G are discrete, though, there are no con-
tinuous functions which are summable along the bres, and it necessary to
replace the sums in the denition of convolution by integrals. For instance,
   G is a topological groupoid over B if G and B are topological spaces, and ,  , and
   6

multiplication are continuous maps.

                                              10
if G = Rn  Rn, we can dene a convolution operation on the space Cc (G) of
continuous functions with proper support (i.e. the projection of the closure
of f(x; y )ja(x; y ) 6= 0g onto each factor Rn is a proper map). Multiplication
in Cc (G) is given by the integral formula
                         (a  b)(x; y ) =
                                             Z        a(x; z)b(z; y ) dz;                 (1)
                                                 Rn
where dz is Lebesgue measure.7
   This is precisely the composition law which we obtain by thinking of
each a 2 Cc (G) as the (Schwartz) kernel of an operator a~ on L2 (Rn):
                             (~a )(x) =
                                             Z
                                       a(x; y ) (y )dy:
                                    Rn
Not every operator (not even the identity) is realized by a continuous kernel,
but all operators (including unbounded ones) satisfying reasonable continu-
ity properties can be realized by kernels which are distributions, or general-
ized functions on Rn  Rn.
    To dene convolution operations on functions on a general locally com-
pact topological groupoid, we need to start with a family fx g of measures
along the -bres, which will ll the role played by the measure dz in (1)
above. Convolution is then dened8 by
                         (a  b)(g ) =
                                         Z       a(k)b(k 1g )dg (k):
                                         Gg
This operation is associative if the measures g satisfy a suitable left-invari-
ance property.
    From continuous functions on G, on can pass by various processes of
completion and localization to larger groupoid algebras, which play the role
of continuous functions, measurable functions, or even distributions on the
orbit space of G. We refer to the books [4], [14], and [16] for more details.
    A more intrinsic construction of groupoid algebras, free of the choice of
measures, can also be given. It includes as special cases the convolution
of measures on a group G and the multiplication of half-density kernels on
Rn  Rn. The denition can be found on p. 101 of [4] for the case of
   7
      Dirac's notation hxjajyi for a(x; y) emphasizes the idea that the values of a are \tran-
sition amplitudes" between \states" and so ts nicely with the groupoid interpretation of
(1).
    8
      This denition seems to be due to J. Westman [20].

                                                 11
Lie groupoids (see Section 5 below). A construction related to Mackey's
intrinsic Hilbert spaces [10] should extend this idea to a general locally
compact groupoid with a prescribed family of measure classes along the
-bres.

5 Lie groupoids and Lie algebroids
A groupoid G over B is a Lie groupoid if G and B are dierentiable mani-
folds, and ,  , and multiplication are dierentiable maps.9 For example, the
pair groupoid M  M over any dierentiable manifold M is a Lie groupoid,
and any Lie group is a Lie groupoid over a single point.
    The innitesimal object associated with a Lie groupoid is a Lie algebroid.
A Lie algebroid over a manifold B is dened to be a vector bundle A over B
with a Lie algebra structure [ ; ] on its space of smooth sections, together
with a bundle map  : A ! TB (called the anchor of the Lie algebroid)
satisfying the conditions:
   1. [(X ); (Y )] = ([X; Y ]);
    2. [X; 'Y ] = '[X; Y ] + ((X )  ')Y:
Here, X and Y are smooth sections of A, ' is a smooth function on B , and
the bracket on the left hand side of the rst condition is the usual Jacobi-Lie
bracket of vector elds. For example, the tangent bundle TB with the usual
bracket, and the identity map as anchor, is a Lie algebroid over B , while
any Lie algebra is a Lie algebra over a single point.
     The Lie algebroid of a Lie groupoid is dened via left-invariant vector
elds, just as it is in the case of Lie groups. Since the left translation by
a groupoid element g maps only from G (g) to G(g), we must rst restrict
the values of our vector elds to lie in the subbundle T G = ker(T) of
TG. For every x in B and every g in the -bre  1 (x), the bre Tg G
can be identied with T(x)G via left translation by g . Thus, the space of
left-invariant sections of T G along  1 (x) can be identied with the single
space Ax G = T(x)G, and T gives a well dened map x : Ax G ! TxB .
The (disjoint) union of these objects for all x in B forms a vector bundle
AG over B with a bundle map  : AG ! TB. (See Figure 5.) Identifying
   9
    A further technical condition is included in the denition to insure that the domain of
multiplication is a smooth submanifold of G  G; the derivatives of  and  are required
to have maximal rank everywhere.

                                            12
                                           image under 



                                                                        G(0)




                            -bres              -bres

 Figure 5: The groupoid G with an element of A and its image under .

the sections of AG with left-invariant sections of T G  TG and using the
usual bracket on sections of TG denes a bracket of sections on AG making
it into a Lie algebroid with anchor .
     For instance, the Lie algebroid of B  B is TB , and by extension of
a well-known idea from Lie group theory, one may think of the Jacobi-
Lie bracket on sections of TB as being the innitesimal remnant of the
noncommutativity of the composition law (x; y )(y; z ) = (x; z ).
     The local versions of Lie's three fundamental theorems all extend from
groups to groupoids, but there are some interesting dierences at the global
level. For instance, although every subalgebroid A0 of AG is indeed AG0 for
a Lie groupoid G0, there may be no such G0 for which the induced morphism
G0 ! G is globally one-to-one. More seriously (and contrary to an incorrect
assertion in [15]), there exist Lie algebroids which are \non-integrable" in
the sense that they are not the Lie algebroid of any global Lie groupoid
at all. (There is a local Lie groupoid corresponding to any Lie algebroid,
though.) We refer to Chapter V of [8] for a discussion of all this, together
with further references.




                                      13
6 Boundary Lie algebroids
In this section, we will explain how Lie algebroids provide a natural setting
for understanding some recent work by R. Melrose [12] [13] on the anal-
ysis of (pseudo)dierential operators on manifolds with boundary. (Some
prior knowledge about such operators on manifolds without boundary will
be assumed here.)
     The space X (M; @M ) of vector elds which are tangent to the boundary
@M of a manifold M forms a Lie algebra over R and a module over C 1 (M ),
and the condition [X; 'Y ] = '[X; Y ] + (X  ')Y is satised (since it is
satised for all vector elds and functions). Remarkably, there is a vector
bundle b TM over M whose sections are in one-to-one correspondence with
the elements of X (M; @M ) via a bundle map  : b TM ! TM which is an
isomorphism over the interior of M , and whose image over a boundary point
is the tangent space to @M at that point. These structures make b TM into
a Lie algebroid. We refer to [12] for a precise denition of b TM , mentioning
here only that, when (y1 ; : : : ; yn 1 ; x) are local coordinates for M dened
on an open subset of the half space x  0, a local basis over C 1 (M ) for the
sections of b TM is given by ( @y@ 1 ; : : : ; @yn@ 1 ; x @x
                                                          @ ):
     Melrose develops analysis on M by regarding the b-tangent bundle b TM
as the \correct" tangent bundle for this manifold with boundary. Thus, the
algebra of b-dierential operators is the algebra of operators on C 1 (M ) gen-
erated by the sections of b TM (acting on functions via ) and C 1 (M ) (acting
on itself by multiplication).10 The principal symbols of these operators are
homogeneous functions on the dual, or b-cotangent bundle b T M: Inverting
(modulo smoothing operators) elliptic b-dierential operators leads to the
notion of b-pseudodierential operators, whose symbols are again functions
on the b-cotangent bundle.
     Since the b-pseudodierential operators act on C 1 (M ), their Schwartz
kernels are distributions on M  M , which is a manifold with corners. Analy-
sis of these kernels is facilitated, though, by lifting them to a certain manifold
with boundary, b (M  M ), obtained from M  M by a blowing-up operation
along the corners. The case where M is a half-open interval is illustrated in
Figure 6. The general case is locally the product of this one with a manifold
without boundary.
     It turns out that b (M M ) is a groupoid whose Lie algebroid is b TM , and
  10
    Such a \universal enveloping algebra" was already dened for general Lie algebroids
by Rinehart [17].

                                          14
       G                                           b
                                                       G




                         G(0)                                     b
                                                                      G(0)

                                 isotropy groupoid of 0

Figure 6: The groupoids G = M  M and b G = b (M  M ), where M = [0; 1).

that the composition law for b-kernels ([12], Equation (5.66)) is precisely the
convolution operation in the groupoid algebra of b (M  M ). Thus, we can
think of the groupoid b (M M ) and its Lie algebroid b TM as providing a new
\internal symmetry structure" appropriate to our manifold with boundary.
    It is therefore interesting to understand the structure of the groupoid
b (M  M ). In fact, it decomposes algebraically (though not topologically)
as the disjoint union of the pair groupoid over the interior of M and the
groupoid G over @M for which (;  ) 1(x; y ) consists of the orientation
preserving linear isomorphisms between the normal lines Ty M=Ty (@M ) and
Tx M=Tx(@M ). Thus, with the \geometric structure" on M provided by the
enlarged pair groupoid b (M  M ), each point of the boundary @M has the
internal symmetries are those of an oriented 1-dimensional vector space. We
should think of the vectors in this space as being points \innitesimally far"
from the boundary, so that the boundary of M becomes an \innitesimal
boundary layer." The section x @x @ of b TM can now be seen as pointing into
this layer in a non trivial way along @M ; that is why it is not zero there.
    At this point, our use of Lie algebroids and Lie groupoids adds only
a geometric picture to Melrose's analysis. It does, however, suggest the
possibility of extending the theory of pseudodierential operators to algebras
of operators associated with other Lie algebroids. In fact, the theory of
longitudinal operators on foliated manifolds (see Section I.5. ) of [4] is an
example of such an extension, but the class of Lie algebroids which can be
treated in this way remains to be determined. An interesting test case should
be the Lie algebroids associated with the Bruhat-Poisson structures on ag
manifolds [7], since the corresponding orbit decomposition on a ag manifold
is the Bruhat decomposition, which plays a central role in representation

                                      15
theory.

7 Conclusion
This article has presented a small sample of the applications of groupoids in
analysis, algebra, and topology. R. Brown has reported in [2] the suggestion
of F.W. Lawvere that groupoids should perhaps be renamed \groups", and
those special groupoids with just one base point given a new name to reect
their singular nature. Even if this is too far to go, I hope to have convinced
the reader that groupoids are worth knowing about, and worth looking out
for.11

References
 [1] Brandt, W., U ber eine Verallgemeinerung des Gruppenbegries, Math.
     Ann. 96 (1926), 360-366.
 [2] Brown, R., From groups to groupoids: a brief survey, Bull. London
     Math. Soc. 19 (1987), 113-134.
 [3] Brown, R., Topology: a geometric account of general topology, homotopy
     types, and the fundamental groupoid, Halsted Press, New York, 1988.
 [4] Connes, A., Noncommutative Geometry, Academic Press, San Diego,
     1994.
 [5] Ehresmann, C., Oeuvres completes et commentees, ed. A.C. Ehres-
     mann, Suppl. Cahiers Top. Geom. Di., Amiens, 1980-1984.
 [6] Karasev, M.V., Analogues of objects of Lie group theory for nonlinear
     Poisson brackets, Math. USSR Izvestia 28, (1987), 497-527.
 [7] Lu, J.-H., and Weinstein, A., Poisson Lie groups, dressing transforma-
     tions, and the Bruhat decomposition, J. Di. Geom. 31 (1990), 501-
     526.
  11
       Any reader stimulated to look further may wish to consult the Groupoid Home Page,
http://amath-www.colorado.edu:80/math/department/groupoids/groupoids.shtml
(under construction in January 1996).



                                            16
 [8] Mackenzie, K., Lie Groupoids and Lie Algebroids in Dierential Geom-
     etry, LMS Lecture Notes Series, 124, Cambridge Univ. Press, 1987.
 [9] Mackenzie, K., Classication of principal bundles and Lie groupoids
     with prescribed gauge group bundle, J. Pure Appl. Algebra 58 (1989),
     181-208.
[10] Mackey, G.W., The Mathematical Foundations of Quantum Mechanics,
     W.A. Benjamin, New York, 1963.
[11] Mackey, G.W., Ergodic theory and virtual groups, Math. Ann. 166
     (1966), 187-207.
[12] Melrose, R.B., The Atiyah-Patodi-Singer Index Theorem, A.K. Peters,
     Wellesley, 1993.
[13] Melrose, R.B., Geometric Scattering Theory, Cambridge Univ. Press,
     Cambridge, 1995.
[14] Moore, C.C. and Schochet, C., Global Analysis on Foliated Spaces,
     MSRI Publications 9, Springer-Verlag, New York (1988).
[15] Pradines, J., Troisieme theoreme de Lie sur les groupodes dier-
     entiables, C. R. Acad. Sc. Paris, 267 (1968), 21 - 23.
[16] Renault, J., A groupoid approach to C  algebras, Lecture Notes in
     Math. 793 (1980).
[17] Rinehart, G.S., Dierential forms on general commutative algebras,
     Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 108, 195-222.
[18] Weinstein, A., Symplectic groupoids and Poisson manifolds, Bull.
     Amer. Math. Soc. 16, (1987), 101-104.
[19] Weinstein, A., Noncommutative geometry and geometric quantization,
     Symplectic Geometry and Mathematical Physics: actes du colloque en
     l'honneur de Jean-Marie Souriau, P. Donato et al eds., Birkhauser,
     Boston, 1991, pp. 446-461.
[20] Westman, J., Harmonic analysis on groupoids, Pacic J. Math. 27
     (1968), 621-632.


                                    17
[21] Yaglom, I. M., Felix Klein and Sophus Lie: evolution of the idea of
     symmetry in the Nineteenth Century, Birkhauser, Boston, 1988.
[22] Zakrzewski, S., Quantum and classical pseudogroups, I and II, Comm.
     Math. Phys. 134 (1990), 347-370, 371-395.




                                  18
