                                                       HOMOMORPHISMS BETWEEN WEYL MODULES FOR SL3 (k)

                                                                                ANTON COX AND ALISON PARKER
arXiv:math/0508520v1 [math.RT] 26 Aug 2005




                                                     Abstract. We classify all homomorphisms between Weyl modules for SL3 (k) when k is an
                                                     algebraically closed field of characteristic at least three, and show that the Hom-spaces are all
                                                     at most one-dimensional. As a corollary we obtain all homomorphisms between Specht modules
                                                     for the symmetric group when the labelling partitions have at most three parts and the prime
                                                     is at least three. We conclude by showing how a result of Fayers and Lyle on Hom-spaces for
                                                     Specht modules is related to earlier work of Donkin for algebraic groups.




                                                                                          1. Introduction

                                                Let G be a reductive algebraic group over an algebraically closed field of characteristic p > 0.
                                             An important class of modules for such a group are the Weyl modules ∆(λ), labelled by dominant
                                             weights; these can be constructed (relatively) explicitly, and their heads provide a full set of simple
                                             modules for G. (Equivalently one can study the duals of these modules, denoted ∇(λ) which
                                             have the advantage of being induced from one-dimensional modules for a Borel subgroup). In
                                             determining the structure of such modules, or indeed their cohomology, the calculation of Hom-
                                             spaces between them is a useful tool.
                                                Relatively little is known in general about such Hom-spaces. In type A, when λ and µ are
                                             related by a (suitable) single reflection, explicit non-zero homomorphisms from ∆(λ) to ∆(µ) were
                                             constructed (with some restrictions) by Carter and Lusztig [3], and (more generally) by Carter
                                             and Payne [4]. The corresponding cases in other types were considered by Franklin [14]. While it
                                             is clear that there should be a hierarchy of families of homomorphisms corresponding to different
                                             powers of p, the only case where the above results provide a complete classification is when G is
                                             SL2 , where it is relatively easy to determine all Hom-spaces exactly [6].
                                                The only other general results in this area, by Andersen [1] and Koppinen [18], concern homo-
                                             morphisms between modules labelled by weights which are ‘close together’. Typically such results
                                             show that certain Hom-spaces are non-zero, or in some cases one-dimensional. For weights which
                                             are far apart and not related by a single reflection almost nothing is known.
                                                In this paper we will determine all homomorphisms between Weyl modules for SL3 when p ≥ 3,
                                             and provide a recursive procedure for determining the composition factors arising in the image (or
                                             kernel) of such maps in most cases. From these results we will also classify all homomorphisms
                                             between Specht modules for the symmetric groups corresponding to three part partitions, when
                                             p ≥ 3.
                                                After a section of preliminaries, we review the SL3 data concerning p-filtrations that we will
                                             need from [21]. This describes certain filtrations of induced modules which will allow us to proceed
                                             by induction, together with the set of p-good homomorphisms which will be fundamental in our
                                             later constructions. We also recall a theorem of Carter and Payne [4] on the existence of certain
                                             homomorphisms. These will be the two key sets of data which we need to determine all possible
                                             homomorphisms.
                                                With the notation developed up to that point in place, in Section 4 we can give the strategy
                                             to be followed in the remainder of the paper, and in particular the translation functor arguments

                                               The first author was partially supported by Nuffield grant scheme NUF-NAL 02.
                                               2000 Mathematics Subject classification: 20G05 (primary) and 20C30 (secondary).
                                                                                                    1
2                                 ANTON COX AND ALISON PARKER


that form the basis of our argument. This section also contains a more precise description of the
main results that will be obtained.
   The rest of the paper takes the form of a single inductive argument on the weight labelling
our induced module. In Section 5 we show (Theorem 5.1) that Hom(∇(λ), ∇(µ)) is at most one-
dimensional. Unfortunately the proof relies on the fact that for one very specific configuration
of weights τ and ν there are no homomorphisms from ∇(τ ) to ∇(ν) (Assumption 5.2). Thus
we cannot complete this proof until we have classified all possible homomorphisms from induced
modules labelled by smaller weights, and hence it forms the first step in our inductive argument.
   We then come to the heart of the paper, Sections 6–9. In Section 6 we analyse the homomor-
phisms constructed by Carter and Payne in the SL3 case. We begin by giving (up to a controllable
ambiguity in certain non-generic cases) a recursive procedure for describing such homomorphisms
(Proposition 6.3), and use this to determine which composites of such maps are non-zero (Corollary
6.4).
   We begin in Section 7 to determine precisely which Hom-spaces are non-zero, by starting with
those obtained inductively from composites of Carter-Payne maps. This uses translation functor
arguments, together with the explicit construction of homomorphisms from the previous section.
For weights close to the boundary of the dominant region it is more convenient to use a different
argument (Proposition 8.3), based on Doty’s description of the structure of symmetric powers [10]
as reinterpreted in [5].
   As well as the Carter-Payne maps, there is another class of maps obtained by ‘twisting’, which
are easy to describe. Unfortunately not every map comes from Carter-Payne composites or twisting,
and hence in Section 9 we must construct the remaining maps by hand (by gluing together maps
defined on appropriate parts of the p-filtrations of the two modules), to complete the classification.
With this we see that Assumption 5.2 does indeed hold, and the main results in the paper now
follow by induction.
    In Section 10 we illustrate our main results with some examples for the case p = 3.
   Using a theorem of Carter and Lusztig there is a close relationship between homomorphisms
between induced modules for SL3 (k) and between Specht modules for symmetric groups kΣd . In
Section 11 we show how our results also give a classification of homomorphisms between Specht
modules labelled by partitions with at most three non-zero parts when p ≥ 3. Finally, we recall
a result of Donkin relating Ext-groups between induced modules for a reductive group and for its
Levi factors, and show how this can be used to derive a tensor product theorem of Fayers and Lyle
[13] if p is not two.




                                         2. Preliminaries

    In this section we shall review the basic results required in this paper. Except where otherwise
indicated, this material can be found in found in [17, II, Chapters 1–6]. Although we shall state
these results for an arbitrary reductive algebraic group G, defined over an algebraically closed
field k of characteristic p > 0, for most of this paper we will only be interested in the case when
G = SL3 (k).
   We fix a maximal torus T ⊂ G and hence a weight lattice X(T ). There is an associated root
system R, in which we choose a set of positive roots R+ . The corresponding set of simple roots will
be denoted S. If G is semisimple and simply–connected there is a basis {̟α | α ∈ S} of fundamental
weights for X(T ). Let sα be the reflection on E = X(T ) ⊗Z R given by sα λ = λ − hλ, αˇ iα where
αˇ is the coroot associated to α in X(T )∗ and h−, −i is the usual bilinear form. The Weyl group
W is the group generated by such reflections, while the affine Weyl group Wp is the semidirect
product of W with the group pZR (acting by translation on E).
                      HOMOMORPHISMS BETWEEN WEYL MODULES FOR SL3 (k)                               3

                 P
  Setting ρ = 12 α∈R+ α ∈ E, we define the dot action w.λ = w(λ + ρ) − ρ of Wp on X(T ).
Associated to this action is a system of facets; these are all sets of the form

                   F = {λ ∈ E | hλ + ρ, αˇi = nα p   ∀ α ∈ R0+ (F ),
                                 (nα − 1)p < hλ + ρ, αˇi < nα p ∀ α ∈ R1+ (F )}

for some integers nα and a disjoint decomposition R+ = R0+ (F ) ∪ R1+ (F ). A facet F is called
an alcove if R0+ (F ) = ∅ and a wall if |R0+ (F )| = 1. We shall always assume that p ≥ h (the
maximum of the Coxeter numbers of the connected components of G), which ensures that every
alcove contains a weight. The closure (respectively upper/lower closure) of a facet F is the set
obtained from F by replacing both (respectively the right/lefthand) strict inequalities occurring in
the defining equations for F by non-strict inequalities. The closure of any alcove is a fundamental
domain for the (dot) action of the affine Weyl group, and we call the alcove containing the origin
the fundamental alcove. Occasionally we will need to consider pe -facets; these are defined as above
but with all occurrences of p replaced by pe (and hence are associated to the action of Wpe ).
  We will also need to consider the set of dominant weights

                         X + = {λ ∈ X(T ) | 0 < hλ + ρ, αˇi for all α ∈ S}

and its subset of p-restricted weights X1 (T ) defined by imposing the additional constraint that
hλ + ρ, αˇi ≤ p for all α ∈ S. Any weight λ can be uniquely written in the form λ = λ′ + pλ′′ with
λ′ ∈ X1 (T ), and any decomposition of a weight in this way will be assumed to be of this form.
   Given a Borel T ⊂ B ⊂ G we can define the modules ∇(λ) = indG     B kλ where kλ is the one-
dimensional B-module of weight λ. By choosing B appropriately, we may arrange that ∇(λ) is
non–zero precisely when λ is dominant. There is a contravariant duality on G, and the Weyl
module ∆(λ) is the contravariant dual of ∇(λ). Both ∇(λ) and ∆(λ) has the same character,
given by Weyl’s character formula. Clearly we have Hom(∆(µ), ∆(λ)) ∼  = Hom(∇(λ), ∇(µ)), and
hence for the remainder of this paper we will consider only induced rather than Weyl modules.
(Note that throughout we will abuse notation and write Hom for HomG .)
    For each λ ∈ X + , the module ∇(λ) has simple socle L(λ), and all simple modules arise in
this manner. All other composition factors L(µ) of ∇(λ) satisfy µ < λ in the dominance order
determined by R+ , and the strong linkage principle implies that µ ∈ Wp .λ. Thus Hom(∇(λ), ∇(µ))
is non–zero only if µ ≤ λ and µ ∈ Wp .λ. Note that for a given weight λ, the highest weight of any
composition factor of ∇(λ) can be specified by determining the facet in which this highest weight
lies. By Steinberg’s tensor product Theorem, for any dominant weight λ we have an isomorphism
L(λ) ∼= L(λ′ ) ⊗ L(λ′′ )F , where F is the Frobenius morphism. In the special case λ = (p − 1)ρ
we have that ∇(λ) ∼  = L(λ), and we call this the Steinberg module St. All simple modules are
contravariantly self-dual.
   Given weights λ, µ in the closure of some alcove F , there is a unique dominant weight ν in
W (µ − λ). We define the translation functor Tλµ from λ to µ on a module V by Tλµ V = prµ (L(ν) ⊗
prλ V ), where prτ V is the largest submodule of V all of whose composition factors have highest
weights in Wp .τ . We summarise the properties of translation functors that we shall require in the
following proposition (proofs can be found in [17, II, Chapter 7]).

Proposition 2.1. Let λ and µ be in the closure of some facet F . Then

     (i) Tλµ is an exact functor, and is adjoint to Tµλ .
    (ii) If λ and µ lie in the same facet then Tλµ is an equivalence of categories from the category
         of modules V with prλ V = V to the category of modules V with prµ V = V .
   (iii) If µ is in the closure of the facet containing λ then Tλµ ∇(λ) ∼
                                                                        = ∇(µ).
   (iv) More generally, Tλµ ∇(λ) has a filtration 0 = T0 ⊂ · · · ⊂ Tt−1 ⊂ Tt = Tλµ ∇(λ) such that
         the factors Ti /Ti−1 are all of the form ∇(wi .µ) where wi ∈ StabWp (λ) with wi .µ ∈ X + ,
         each such factor occurring exactly once. Further, this filtration may be taken such that
         wi .µ < wj .µ implies that i < j.
4                                  ANTON COX AND ALISON PARKER


   We say that a module V has a good filtration if it has a filtration with all factors of the form
∇(λi ) with λi ∈ X + , and denote by (V : ∇(µ)) the number of factors of the form ∇(µ) in
such a filtration. (This is independent of our choice of good filtration.) We call any module V
such that both V and its dual have a good filtration a tilting module. By [9] there is for each
dominant weight λ a unique indecomposable tilting module T (λ) with that highest weight, and
every indecomposable tilting module arises in this way.
   Similarly we say that a module V has a good p-filtration if it has a filtration all of whose factors
of the form ∇p (λ) = ∇(λ′′i )F ⊗ L(λ′i ) (recall our standing convention for such a decomposition of
λ). In [17, II, Proposition 9.11] Jantzen gives a criterion for ∇(λ) to have a good p-filtration, while
for p ≥ 2h − 2 Andersen [2, 3.7 Corollary] has shown that such good p-filtrations always exist. For
our purposes it is enough to note [16, 3.13] that ∇(λ) with λ ∈ X + , always has a good p-filtration
in the case of SL3 (k). As these are the only type of p-filtrations which we will consider, we will
usually omit the qualifier ‘good’.
   For any dominant weight λ we have that ∇(pλ + (p − 1)ρ) ∼       = ∇(λ)F ⊗ St. Indeed the functor
V 7−→ V ⊗ St induces [17, II, 10.5(1)] an equivalence of categories from the category of all
          F

modules to the category of those modules all of whose composition factors are of the form L(λ)
with λ′ = (p − 1)ρ. More generally, the functor V 7−→ V F ⊗ L(λ) where λ ∈ X1 (T ) induces an
isomorphism of submodule lattices [12, Lemma 1.2].
   We denote the (scheme theoretic) kernel of the Frobenius morphism by G1 . The simple modules
for this subgroup are precisely the restrictions of the simple G-modules with p-restricted highest
weights. As HomG (U, V ) ∼= (V ⊗ U ∗ )G ∼ = ((V ⊗ U ∗ )G1 )G/G1 , and G ∼= G/G1 via F , we deduce
that                                        
                                               Hom(∇(λ′′ ), ∇(µ′′ )) if λ′ = µ′
                   Hom(∇p (λ), ∇p (µ)) ∼ =                                                     (1)
                                               0                     otherwise
for all dominant weights λ and µ.
   Any G-module W which is trivial as a G1 -module is of the form V F for some G-module V , and
we define W (−1) = V . The (usual) dual of ∇(λ) is a Weyl module, which we denote by ∆(λ∗ ).
Finally, if U, V, X, Y are finite dimensional G-modules then we have
                        Exti (U ⊗ X F , V ⊗ Y F ) ∼
                           G1                     = Exti (U, V ) ⊗ (X ∗ )F ⊗ Y F
                                                        G1                                   (2)
(as a G-module) for all i ≥ 0.

                                             3. SL3 data

   In this section we will describe explicitly the good p-filtration for ∇(λ) in the case of SL3 (k).
The detailed structure of these filtrations was given in [21, Theorem 4.12], and we summarise those
results here. Further information about these filtrations also appears in [19, Chapter 2]. We will
use this to give an explicit description of p-good homomorphisms (defined below) between induced
modules, and recall a general result about homomorphisms due to Carter and Payne which will be
needed in what follows.
Definition 3.1. A p-good homomorphism is a homomorphism φ between two modules which both
have p-good filtrations, such that the image and kernel of φ both have good p-filtrations.

   For SL3 (k) we shall denote the two simple roots by α1 and α2 . A weight λ ∈ X(T ) can be
identified with a pair of integers (a, b) via λ = a̟α1 + b̟α2 . With this convention we can identify
X + with the subset N2 of Z2 . The set of p-restricted weights X1 (T ) contains two alcoves; the
fundamental alcove C0 is the alcove containing the origin. Any alcove which is a translate of the
fundamental alcove will be called a down alcove, while translates of the remaining p-restricted
alcove will be called up alcoves. We extend our earlier notation and write λ = p(a′′ , b′′ ) + (a′ , b′ )
where (a′ , b′ ) ∈ X1 (T ). In order to describe the good p-filtration of ∇(λ), it is enough (by the
strong linkage principle) to indicate the facets in which the highest weights of the factors in the
p-filtration occur. By the translation principle (Proposition 2.1(ii)) the configuration of facets
obtained depends only on the facet containing λ and not on the weight itself. Thus we will
                          HOMOMORPHISMS BETWEEN WEYL MODULES FOR SL3 (k)                                   5


represent the factors ∇p (λi ) by numbers corresponding to an appropriate labelling of the facets in
each case.
   In the diagrams representing good p-filtrations, the factors of a filtration will be represented by
labels with lines connecting them. Two factors will be joined if and only if there is a nontrivial
extension (in ∇(λ)) between them. The diagrams are oriented so that sections that embed in ∇(λ)
occur at the bottom of the diagram. If λ′′i is not dominant for some factor ∇p (λi ) occurring in one
of our diagrams then we interpret this factor as the zero module (i.e. we ignore that part of the
diagram).
   We now list the various cases that can arise, according to [21, Theorem 4.12]. If a′′ and b′′ ≥ 1
and (a′ , b′ ) lies in the fundamental alcove then there are nine factors in the p-filtration as indicated
in Figure 1a(i), and the structure of this filtration (when a′′ and b′′ 6≡ 0 (mod p)) is given in Figure
1a(ii). If a′′ ≡ 0 (mod p) (respectively b′′ ≡ 0 (mod p)) then there is an additional extension of
∇p (λ5 ) by ∇p (λ6 ) (respectively of ∇p (λ3 ) by ∇p (λ8 )). If both a′′ and b′′ ≡ 0 (mod p) then the
structure is given in Figure 1a(iii); the other cases are similar.

               a(i)                       a(ii)               9               a(iii)           9
                              1
                          4       2               5   6       7       8   3            6       7       8
                          8       6                                                    5               3
                              9
                                                          4       2
                      5       7       3                                                    4       2
                                                              1
                                                                                               1

               b(i)                       b(ii)               3               b(iii)           3
                              4                                                            2       9
                      1       8       6                   2       9
                          2       9                                                    1               6
                          5       7               1   7       8   5       6            7       8       5
                              3                               4                                4


                                                  Figure 1.
       ′   ′
    If (a , b ) lies in the interior of the other p-restricted alcove then there are also nine factors in
the p-filtration, as indicated in Figure 1b(i), and the structure of the filtration again depends on
a′′ and b′′ . If both a′′ and b′′ 6≡ −1 (mod p) then it is given in Figure 1b(ii) while if a′′ ≡ −1
(mod p) (respectively if b′′ ≡ −1 (mod p)) then there is an additional extension of ∇p (λ5 ) by
∇p (λ6 ) (respectively of ∇p (λ7 ) by ∇p (λ1 )). If both a′′ and b′′ ≡ −1 (mod p) then the structure is
illustrated in Figure 1b(iii); the other cases are similar.
   There are two remaining alcove cases: where λ lies in a down alcove and either a′′ = 0 or b′′ = 0.
As these cases are symmetric we only consider the latter. So suppose that λ = p(a′′ , 0) + (a′ , b′ )
with (a′ , b′ ) ∈ C0 . Then ∇(λ) has three factors in the p-filtration, as indicated in Figure 2a(i)
(where the shaded region represents the boundary of the dominant region), and the structure of
the filtration is given in Figure 2a(ii). When we need to distinguish between the two down alcove
cases we shall refer to those as in Figure 1a(i) as internal down alcoves, and those as in Figure
2a(i) (and the symmetric version thereof) as just dominant down alcoves. We shall also refer to
the up alcoves immediately above just dominant down alcoves as just dominant, and similarly the
walls between two just dominant alcoves. All other walls will be referred to as interior walls. To
distinguish further the just dominant down alcove cases we shall refer to that illustrated in Figure
2a(i) as the right-hand case, and to the symmetric version (which we number in the symmetric
fashion) as the left-hand case.
   Next we consider the various wall cases. If a′ + b′ = p − 2 then λ lies on one of the horizontal
walls in our diagrams. There are now four factors in our filtration, as indicated in Figure 2b(i), and
the structure of the filtration is given in Figure 2b(ii). The remaining two wall cases are symmetric,
6                                          ANTON COX AND ALISON PARKER


                     a(i)    111
                             000                   a(ii)               b(i)                 b(ii)
                             000
                             111
                                                           3

                             000
                             111
                             2 1                                                    1   2               4
                             000
                             111                                            3
                             000
                             111                           2
                            3111
                             000
                                                                                                 2          3

                             000
                             111                                                    4
                             000
                             111                           1                                            1


                            c(i)                           c(ii)        4
                                                                                        c(iii)      4
                                       1
                                                                                                    3
                                               3                   2            3
                                           4
                                                                                                    2
                                   2
                                                                        1                           1


                                                           Figure 2.

so we only consider the case where λ = p(a′′ , b′′ ) + (p − 1, b′). We refer to this case as the left-hand
diagonal wall. Once again there are four factors in the filtration as indicated in Figure 2c(i). If
a′′ 6≡ −1 (mod p) then the structure is as in Figure 2c(ii), otherwise it is as in Figure 2c(iii). For
right-hand walls we will use the numbering of the four factors given by reflecting the diagram (so
that the top and bottom factors in the filtration are also labelled by 4 and 1 respectively). The
only remaining case is when λ lies on a vertex, i.e. λ′ = (p − 1)ρ. But in this case there is only a
single factor in the p-filtration, as noted in the previous section.
    In what follows we will frequently make use of
Lemma 3.2. Suppose that G = SL3 (k). For all λ ∈ X + the module ∇p (λ) has a simple head.

Proof: Jantzen has shown [16, 6.9] that ∇(µ) has simple head for all dominant weights µ, provided
that p > 3, and in [21, Proposition 4.11] the restriction on p has been removed. Now the result
follows from [12, Lemma 1.2].                                                                  
   Our goal is to determine Hom(∇(λ), ∇(µ)) for all pairs of dominant weights λ and µ. In order
to construct homomorphisms we will need the following result of Carter and Payne.
Theorem 3.3. Suppose that G = SLn (k) and that λ, µ ∈ X + satisfy the following conditions:
      (i) µ < λ.
     (ii) There exists some integer e > 0 such that:
           (a) λ and µ are mirror images in some pe -wall L and
          (b) L is the unique pe -wall between λ and µ (possibly containing λ or µ) parallel to L.
Then Hom(∇(λ), ∇(µ)) 6= 0.

Proof: See [4].                                                                                                     
                                                                                                                e
   When we refer to such a homomorphism from ∇(λ) to ∇(µ) as reflection about a p -wall, we
shall assume that e is chosen to be minimal with that property. For SL3 we shall refer to the three
cases as reflection to the left (L), right (R), and below (B), depending on the relative positions of
λ and µ.
   Theorem 3.3 allows us to construct homomorphisms between widely separated weights, but
provides no information as to their structure. For SL3 (k) we will be able to provide this extra
information using the explicit description of p-good morphisms given in [21]. Thus we conclude
this section by reviewing this data.
   In the following lemma we describe all non-zero p-good homomorphisms between induced mod-
ules. We will consider each of the cases illustrated in Figures 1 and 2 in turn (the remaining cases
are symmetric). In each case we will describe homomorphisms from ∇(λ) in terms of the labelling
of facets given in the figure corresponding to λ. The image of such a homomorphism ∇(λ) → ∇(λi )
will then be isomorphic to the smallest quotient of the p-filtration of ∇(λ) containing ∇p (λi ), which
can be read off the corresponding diagrams in Figures 1 and 2.
                      HOMOMORPHISMS BETWEEN WEYL MODULES FOR SL3 (k)                                7


Lemma 3.4. For a dominant weight λ there exists a non-zero p-good homomorphism ∇(λ) →
∇(λi ) if and only if λi is dominant and the pair (λ, i) occurs in the following table (where we
identify λ with the type of facet in which it occurs):
                               λ                                          i
        Fig 1a: internal down alcove                   1, 2, 4, 6, 8 and 9
        Fig 1b: up alcove                              1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 8 and 9
        Fig 2a: just dominant down alcove              1, 2 and 3
        Fig 2b: horizontal wall                        1, 2, 3 and 4
        Fig 2c: interior diagonal wall                 1, 3 and 4
        Fig 2c: just dominant diagonal wall            1 and 2

Proof: Argue as in the proof of [21, Lemma 5.1], or [17, II, 9.14 Remark 4].                       
   Note that when all terms in the p-filtration of ∇(λ) are simple, the above Lemma gives all
weights µ such that Hom(∇(λ), ∇(µ)) 6= 0. All but four of the p-good homomorphisms above can
be constructed as composites of Carter-Payne maps. The four exceptions are the map from ∇(λ)
to ∇(λ3 ) in the interior up alcove case, the map from ∇(λ) to ∇(λ4 ) in the interior horizontal
wall case, the map from ∇(λ) to ∇(λ2 ) in the just dominant diagonal wall case, and the map
from ∇(λ) to ∇(λ3 ) in the just dominant down alcove case. We will call these latter two maps
the exceptional p-good maps. (It can happen that these exceptional maps can be constructed as
the composite of Carter-Payne maps, as in second example in section 10. This is non-generic
behaviour. Generically, the exceptional p-good maps will not be the composite of Carter-Payne
maps.) Note that all of these p-good maps which are generically composites of Carter-Payne maps
are the maps with image the G1 -head of ∇(λ).

                                      4. Overall strategy

   As the remainder of this paper involves some rather intricate calculations, we devote this section
to an overview of the strategy behind the proof. From this point on we will assume that G = SL3 (k)
and that p > 2 (so that all our facets are non-empty).
   Given a dominant weight λ, we assume that all homomorphisms from ∇(τ ) with τ < λ have
been classified, and that all the corresponding Hom-spaces are one-dimensional. First we claim
that dim Hom(∇(λ), ∇(µ)) is at most one dimensional for all weights µ ∈ X + . Second we claim
that we can find all weights µ < λ such that Hom(∇(λ), ∇(µ)) is non-zero. By induction this will
calculate all possible Hom-spaces for SL3 with p > 2.
   The basic idea is to use translation functors. For weights on a vertex, the result is known
by induction using (1), or the equivalence of categories discussed just before that equation. Next
suppose that λ lies in the closure of a down alcove whose lowest vertex ν is dominant. By induction
the Hom-spaces for ∇(ν) are known. Let
                             Θν = {θ ∈ X + | Hom(∇(ν), ∇(θ)) 6= 0}.
We ‘translate’ all the weights in Θν to a new set Γλ with
                     Γλ = {γ ∈ X + | (Tνλ ∇(θ) : ∇(γ)) 6= 0 for some θ ∈ Θν }.                   (3)

   Now suppose λ lies in an up alcove, and choose τ on the horizontal wall below it. If τ lies in
the closure of a down alcove with lower vertex ν, and ν is dominant, then we further translate the
weights in Γτ to form
                     Γλ = {γ ∈ X + | (Tτλ ∇(θ) : ∇(γ)) 6= 0 for some θ ∈ Γτ }.                   (4)

  In both cases (3) and (4) we now remove all weights in Γλ which are not composition factors of
∇(λ). We would like to claim that the resulting set
                               Υλ = {γ ∈ Γλ | [∇(λ) : L(γ)] 6= 0}
is precisely the set of weights η for which Hom(∇(λ), ∇(η)) =   ∼ k, and that if η 6∈ Υλ then
Hom(∇(λ), ∇(η)) ∼ = 0. However, this is not quite the case and will need to be modified.
8                                ANTON COX AND ALISON PARKER


   In the course of showing that all Hom-spaces are at most one-dimensional (Theorem 5.1) we
easily show that Γλ is an upper bound for the set of weights for which non-zero homomorphisms
can exist, and it is obvious that this can then be refined to give Υλ as an upper bound.
    We already have one family of homomorphisms: those constructed by Carter and Payne. There
is another obvious class of maps, which we will now describe. Suppose that ∇p (τ ) is the top term in
a p-filtration of some ∇(λ). Given any map from ∇(τ ′′ ) to ∇(µ) (which we will know by induction)
we obtain a map from ∇p (τ ) to ∇p (τ ′ + pµ), and hence from ∇(λ) to ∇(τ ′ + pµ) (by killing all
other terms in the p-filtration of ∇(λ)). We will refer to maps arising in this way as twisted maps.
(Of course maps can be both twisted maps and a composite of Carter-Payne maps.)
   We would like to claim that all homomorphisms are either composites of Carter-Payne maps, or
twisted maps. However, this too is not quite correct. To see why, we must consider those dominant
λ not covered by the cases above. First suppose that λ lies in the closure of a just dominant down
alcove. Although we cannot apply the translation functor approach outlined above, it is in fact
possible to determine all homomorphisms directly (Theorem 8.3), using the explicit description
of the structure of symmetric powers given by Doty [10]. (For λ in an up alcove above a just
dominant down alcove, the determination of homomorphisms is now straightforward by translation
arguments.)
   We now return to the sets Υλ . If ν and θ (as used in the definition of these sets) are related by
a composite of Carter-Payne maps then for each weight in Υλ we can either (i) explicitly construct
all possible homomorphisms using composites of Carter-Payne maps or twisted maps, or (ii) show
no map exists. The latter case is rare: for ‘generic’ weights case (ii) never occurs for λ in a down
alcove, and only in very special configurations for λ in an up alcove. For the precise statement for
down alcoves see Theorem 7.2, and for up alcoves Theorem 7.3.
   If ν and θ are instead related by a twisted map, then in most cases the analogues of Theorems
7.2 and 7.3 are straightforward, as every weight in Υλ can be obtained by a twisted map. However,
when (for example) ν = (p − 1)ρ + pλ with λ close to the boundary of the dominant region, there
are additional weights in Υλ which can be reached neither by composites of Carter-Payne maps nor
twisted maps. Unfortunately in these cases maps do exist, and Section 9 of the paper is devoted
to the construction of these exceptional maps.
   We will show that there are a pair of terms at the top of the p-filtration for ∇(λ) which
individually map to a pair of terms at the bottom of the p-filtration for ∇(µ). By considering
pullbacks and pushouts we will show that this pair of maps can be ‘glued together’ to give the
required exceptional map. This will complete our classification of homomorphisms.

                                 5. Dimensions of Hom-spaces

   In this section we begin an inductive procedure that will continue for the rest of the paper. We
show that all Hom-spaces between induced modules are at most one-dimensional, provided that
there are no homomorphisms between certain special pairs of induced modules labelled by smaller
weights. The verification of this hypothesis will follow from the remainder of the paper.
   We say that two weights λ, µ are in the same ∇p -class if λ′ = µ′ and λ′′ and µ′′ are in the
same G-block. Any weight lies in a unique translate of the set of p-restricted weights; note that
λ and µ can only be in the same ∇p -class if they both lie in the same position in the respective
translates (and also have the Steinberg weights immediately above each translate lying in the same
Wp2 -orbit). Clearly if λ and µ are in distinct ∇p -classes, then ∇p (λ) and ∇p (µ) have no common
composition factors. We will also say that two modules are in the same ∇p -class if the highest
weights of their composition factors are all in the same ∇p -class.
Theorem 5.1. For all λ, µ ∈ X + we have
                                    dim Hom(∇(λ), ∇(µ)) ≤ 1.
Further, for those λ for which the set Υλ from Section 4 has been defined we have
                                       Hom(∇(λ), ∇(µ)) = 0
                      HOMOMORPHISMS BETWEEN WEYL MODULES FOR SL3 (k)                                 9


for all µ ∈
          / Υλ .

Proof: We proceed by induction on λ, and may assume that µ ∈ W.λ with µ ≤ λ. If λ is in
the fundamental alcove then ∇(λ) is simple and so we are done by [17, II 2.8 Proposition]. Now
suppose that λ is in the closure of a just dominant down alcove (i.e there does not exist a dominant
weight θ on the vertex immediately below this). By symmetry, it is enough to consider the case
where λ is near to the right hand boundary of the dominant region.
  We first consider the two wall cases. By Figure 2b or c we have a short exact sequence
                                0 → ∇p (λ1 ) → ∇(λ) → ∇p (λa ) → 0                                (5)
where a = 3 in case (b) and a = 2 in case (c). (Recall that two of the four possible terms in the
p-filtration are zero when λ is just dominant.) Hence there exists a long exact sequence
           0 → Hom(∇p (λa ), ∇(µ)) → Hom(∇(λ), ∇(µ)) → Hom(∇p (λ1 ), ∇(µ)) → · · · .
It will be enough to show that the first and third Hom-spaces Hom(∇p (λi ), ∇(µ)) are each at most
one dimensional, as they can never both be non-zero as λ1 and λa are in different ∇p -classes.
    We begin by showing that the image in either case of any non-zero map φ from ∇p (λi ) to ∇(µ)
must be a submodule of ∇p (µ). Clearly ∇p (λi ) and ∇p (µ) must be in the same ∇p -class, as the
socle of ∇(µ) must be a common composition factor. By Figure 2b or c, the only other term in
the p-filtration of ∇p (µ) in this ∇p -class occurs when µ is as in case (b), in which case it is the
factor ∇p (µ4 ). (Recall that to be in the same ∇p -class two weights must lie in the same position
in their respective translates of the set of p-restricted weights.) As all composition factors of im φ
lie in the same ∇p -class, it is enough to show that none of the composition factors in ∇p (µ4 ) occur
in this image. However, the extension of ∇p (µ2 ) by ∇p (µ4 ) has a simple socle, as this extension
is the image under the map ∇(µ1 ) → ∇(µ2 ). Therefore if any composition factor of ∇p (µ4 ) does
occur in im φ then so must soc ∇p (µ2 ), which is impossible.
  Thus we have shown that im φ ≤ ∇p (µ). Now (1), and the induction hypothesis, immediately
implies that the desired Hom-spaces are at most one dimensional, and cannot both be non-zero.
   Next suppose that λ is in the interior of a just dominant down alcove, (and hence that there
exists a weight θ on the diagonal wall below λ). We have a short exact sequence
                                 0 → ∇(ν) → Tθλ ∇(θ) → ∇(λ) → 0                                   (6)
for some ν. This gives rise to an exact sequence
                            0 → Hom(∇(λ), ∇(µ)) → Hom(Tθλ ∇(θ), ∇(µ))                             (7)
and it is enough to show that this final Hom-space is at most one-dimensional. However
                 Hom(T λ ∇(θ), ∇(µ)) ∼
                        θ             = Hom(∇(θ), T θ ∇(µ)) ∼
                                                       λ    = Hom(∇(θ), ∇(τ ))
for some τ (by Proposition 2.1(iii)), and we are done by induction.
   We next consider the case where λ is in the lower closure of an internal down alcove (so there
exists a dominant weight θ on the vertex immediately below this). If λ = θ then ∇(λ) ∼
                                                                                     = ∇(λ′′ )F ⊗St
and block considerations show that to have a non-zero homomorphism we must have ∇(µ) ∼           =
∇(µ′′ )F ⊗ St. Now by (1) we have that
                     Hom(∇(λ′′ )F ⊗ St, ∇(µ′′ )F ⊗ St) ∼
                                                       = Hom(∇(λ′′ ), ∇(µ′′ ))
and we are done by induction.
   Now suppose that λ is in the interior of an internal down alcove. By Proposition 2.1 we have
that Tθλ ∇(θ) has six factors of the form ∇(α), and there is a short exact sequence
                                  0 → X → Tθλ ∇(θ) → ∇(λ) → 0
where X has a good filtration. Hence we have an exact sequence as in (7), and the argument
follows exactly as above. For later use we note that (in this case) if the final Hom-space in (7) is
non-zero then µ must have been in one of the six alcoves adjacent to τ . If λ lies on one of the two
10                                ANTON COX AND ALISON PARKER


walls then the argument is similar, but there are only three weights µ which could give rise to the
weight τ .
   When λ is on the wall in the upper closure of an internal down alcove the proof is a little more
complicated, so we shall first show how the up alcove case follows from it. Thus we suppose that
λ lies in the interior of an up alcove and let θ be a weight on the wall immediately below λ. We
again have a short exact sequence as in (6), and the argument proceeds as in that case.
   Finally we consider the case when λ is on the wall in the upper closure of an internal down
alcove. We have a short exact sequence
                                    0 → M1 → ∇(λ) → M2 → 0
where M1 and M2 are defined by the sequences
           0 → ∇p (λ1 ) → M1 → ∇p (λ2 ) → 0     and    0 → ∇p (λ3 ) → M2 → ∇p (λ4 ) → 0.
Arguing as for the sequence (5), we see that dim Hom(Mi , ∇(µ)) ≤ 1 for i = 1, 2, and thus from
the sequence
                  0 → Hom(M2 , ∇(µ)) → Hom(∇(λ), ∇(µ)) → Hom(M1 , ∇(µ))
we see that we are done unless both these Hom-spaces are non-zero.
   Thus we may assume that Hom(Mi , ∇(µ)) 6= 0 for i = 1, 2. When i = 1 this implies that µ′ = λ′1
or λ′2 , and for i = 2 that µ′ = λ′3 or λ′4 . Therefore we must have µ′ = λ′1 = λ′4 , and so µ lies on
a horizontal wall. Let θ be a weight lying in the interior of the alcove immediately below λ. We
have that
                   Hom(∇(λ), ∇(µ)) ∼ = Hom(Tθλ ∇(θ), ∇(µ)) ∼ = Hom(∇(θ), Tλθ ∇(µ))
and an exact sequence
               0 → Hom(∇(θ), ∇(µl )) → Hom(∇(θ), Tλθ ∇(µ)) → Hom(∇(θ), ∇(µu ))
where µl (respectively µu ) in W.θ lies in the lower (respectively upper) alcove adjacent to µ. By
induction the outer Hom-spaces in this sequence are at most one-dimensional, so it is enough to
prove that they cannot both be non-zero.
  As θ′ = µ′l (as µ is in the same block of λ and they are both on horizontal walls), we will be
done if we can show
Assumption 5.2. Suppose that γ ∈ X + is in an internal down alcove and τ ∈ X + lies on the
horizontal wall above γ. Let w ∈ Wp with w 6= 1. If ν = w.γ is in a dominant down alcove such
that w.τ lies on the horizontal wall above ν then Hom(∇(γ), ∇(ν)) = 0.

   Assumption 5.2 will follow from the results in Sections 7–9, which will thus complete the proof
of Theorem 5.1. (Note that the second part of Theorem 5.1 is clear from the translation arguments
we have used.) Consequently, in what follows we may only apply Theorem 5.1 to weights that are
strictly smaller than λ.                                                                        

                             6. Composites of Carter-Payne maps

  In this section we give a recursive description of the homomorphisms constructed by Carter
and Payne (for SL3 ). Using this we can determine inductively which composites of such maps are
non-zero.
Lemma 6.1. All factors in the p-filtration of ∇(λ) are in distinct ∇p -classes if and only if we are
in one of the following situations:
      (i) λ lies in a down alcove and either the alcove is just dominant or both
           (a) hλ′′ + ρ, α̌i i 6≡ 1 (mod p) for i = 1, 2.
          (b) hλ′′ + ρ, α̌1 + α̌2 i 6≡ 1 (mod p).
     (ii) λ lies in an up alcove and either the alcove is just dominant or both
           (a) hλ′′ + ρ, α̌i i 6≡ 0 (mod p) for i = 1, 2.
          (b) hλ′′ + ρ, α̌1 + α̌2 i 6≡ 1 (mod p).
                         HOMOMORPHISMS BETWEEN WEYL MODULES FOR SL3 (k)                                  11


   (iii)   λ lies on a left-hand diagonal wall and either is just dominant or hλ′′ + ρ, α̌1 i 6≡ 0 (mod p).
   (iv)    λ lies on a right-hand diagonal wall and either is just dominant or hλ′′ +ρ, α̌2 i 6≡ 0 (mod p).
    (v)    λ lies on a horizontal wall and either is just dominant or hλ′′ + ρ, α̌1 + α̌2 i 6≡ 1 (mod p).
   (vi)    λ lies on a vertex.

Proof: This is an elementary calculation using the description of p-filtrations given in the previous
section if p ≥ 5. If p = 3 a little more care is needed for the up and down alcove case as there are
only two p-restricted weights which lie inside alcoves. But looking at the λ′′ that can occur it is
clear that we get the same result as for p ≥ 5 as the λ′′ are mostly too close together to be in the
same G-block.                                                                                      
   We will say that λ is generic if it satisfies the conditions of this lemma. We will say that λ is
sufficiently generic unless either
     (i) λ lies on a diagonal wall and is not generic, or
    (ii) λ lies in a down alcove with hλ′′ + ρ, α̌i i ≡ 1 (mod p) for i = 1 or 2.
We will say that λ is recursively generic if λ is sufficiently generic and either all terms in the p-
filtration of ∇(λ) are simple, or all such terms are of the form ∇p (λi ) with λ′′i recursively generic.
   When λ is non-generic, we will have to consider in detail the structure of extensions between
factors in the p-filtration in the same ∇p -class. The basic properties of these extensions are
summarised in the following lemma.
Lemma 6.2. Suppose that ∇p (λi ) and ∇p (λj ) are two factors in the p-filtration of ∇(λ) in the
same ∇p -class with λi > λj and there is a non-split extension appearing between them in ∇(λ).
Then
                                  Ext1G (∇p (λi ), ∇p (λj )) ∼
                                                             =k
                                                    λ′′
and the non-split extension is isomorphic to (Tµ i ∇(µ))F ⊗ L(λ′i ) (where µ lies on the wall between
λ′′i and λ′′j ) and has simple socle L(λj ). This extension also has simple head provided λ′′i is not
just dominant.

Proof: By considering the various cases that can arise, it is easy to verify that λ′′i and λ′′j are
related by a single left or right reflection. By [21, Lemma 4.2] we have
                            Ext1 (∇p (λi ), ∇p (λj )) ∼
                                   G                  = Ext1 (∇(λ′′ ), ∇(λ′′ ))
                                                             G      i         j

and this latter Ext-group is k using the corresponding SL2 (k) result [11, Theorem 3.6 and Corollary
4.3].
                                       λ′′
   Now consider the translate Tµ i ∇(µ) where µ lies on the wall between λ′′i and λ′′j . Without loss
                                             λ′′                 λ′′
of generality we can pick µ so that Tµ i = prλ′′i (− ⊗ E) or Tµ i = prλ′′i (− ⊗ E ∗ ) where E = ∇(1, 0),
the natural representation and depending on whether λ′′i and λ′′j are related by a right hand or left
                                                                              λ′′
hand reflection, respectively. We want to check that this translate Tµ i ∇(µ) has simple head and
socle. Firstly this translate has short exact sequence
                                                   λ′′
                                   0 → ∇(λ′′j ) → Tµ i ∇(µ) → ∇(λ′′i ) → 0.
So its socle is contained in L(λ′′i )⊕L(λ′′j ) and its head is contained in hd(∇(λ′′i ))⊕hd(∇(λ′′j )) where
hd denotes the head of a module. Thus it is enough to show that one of each of these respective
simple modules cannot be in the socle (or head).
   If λ′′i and λ′′j are in adjacent alcoves then µ is in the closure of the facet containing λ′′i so then
this translate has simple socle L(λ′′j ) and simple head by [17, II, 7.19 Proposition (b)].
   We now suppose that λ′′i and λ′′j are related by a right hand reflection and lie on walls as shown
in Figure 3. The argument for the other cases are similar.
   Now
                             λ′′
              Hom(L(λ′′i ), Tµ i ∇(µ)) ∼
                                       = Hom(L(λ′′i ), ∇(µ) ⊗ E) ∼
                                                                 = Hom(L(λ′′i ) ⊗ E ∗ , ∇(µ))
12                                     ANTON COX AND ALISON PARKER




                                                             λ’’i

                                          λ’’j        µ




                                                 Figure 3.

and λ′′i = pλ′′′′                  ′′     ∗                      ′′′′ F                      ′′′′ F
             i + (0, p − 2). So L(λi ) ⊗ E has character ch(L(λi ) ⊗ ∇(0, p − 1)) + ch(L(λi ) ⊗
∇(1, p−3)) and neither of these factors has G1 -type the same as that of L(µ), which is (p−1, p−2).
                                                           λ′′
Thus the last Hom space must be zero and the socle of Tµ i ∇(µ) is simple. This implies that the
translate must be indecomposable and hence by uniqueness and [12, Lemma 1.2], our desired
                               λ′′     F
extension is isomorphic to Tµ i ∇(µ) ⊗ L(λ′′j ) and has simple socle L(λj ).
     Similarly for the head (when µ is an internal weight) we have
                   ′′
           λ
                                   = Hom(∇(µ) ⊗ E, hd(∇(λ′′j ))) ∼
      Hom(Tµ i ∇(µ), hd(∇(λ′′j ))) ∼                             = Hom(∇(µ), hd(∇(λ′′j )) ⊗ E ∗ )
and hd(∇(λ′′j )) = L(η) = L(pη ′′ + (p − 1, 0). So L(η) ⊗ E ∗ has character ch(L(η ′′ )F ⊗ ∇(p − 1, 1)) +
ch(L(η ′′ )F ⊗ ∇(p − 2, 0)) and neither of these factors has G1 -type the same as that of hd(∇((µ))),
                                                                                 λ′′
which is (0, p − 1). Thus the last Hom space must be zero and the head of Tµ i ∇(µ) is simple.
   If µ is a just dominant weight then the head of ∇(µ) has G1 -type (p − 2, 0) so our argument
fails. In fact in this case the translate has non-simple head so the condition on λ′′i in the lemma is
necessary.                                                                                          
   If λ and µ satisfy the conditions of Theorem 3.3 for some e > 0, with µ to the left (respectively
to the right, below) λ we denote the corresponding Carter-Payne map φ by φeL (respectively φeR ,
φeB ). To each of these maps there is a corresponding local (i.e. e = 1) map starting at λ (which
if λ is on a wall may by the identity map). These local maps are p-good homomorphisms, and we
refer to the set of terms in the p-filtration of ∇(λ) which survive (necessarily completely) under
such a map φ as the p-factors (of ∇(λ)) associated to φ, unless both λ lies in an up alcove or on
a horizontal wall, and φ = φ>1 B . In these remaining cases we refer only to the top term in the
p-filtration of ∇(λ) as such a p-factor.
Proposition 6.3. Suppose that λ and µ satisfy the conditions of Theorem 3.3 for some e > 0. In
all cases the Carter-Payne map φ is non-zero only on the p-factors associated to φ, and on such
a factor ∇p (λi ) it is induced via twisting from the corresponding Carter-Payne map from ∇(λ′′i )
about an (e − 1)-wall in all but the following cases:
       (i)   λ   in a down alcove with λ3 and λ8 in the same ∇p -class, φ = φR , and i = 3 or 8.
      (ii)   λ   in a down alcove with λ5 and λ6 in the same ∇p -class, φ = φL , and i = 5 or 6.
     (iii)   λ   on a LH diagonal wall with λ2 and λ3 in the same ∇p -class, φ = φL , and i = 2 or 3.
     (iv)    λ   on a RH diagonal wall with λ2 and λ3 in the same ∇p -class, φ = φR , and i = 2 or 3.
In each of these four cases the map induced on ∇p (λi ) is non-zero, but does not come from the
twist of the corresponding Carter-Payne map.

   Thus if λ is recursively generic then the composition factors occurring in the image of ∇(λ)
under the Carter-Payne homomorphism φ can be described inductively using the local data from
the preceding section. In the remaining cases the above description will be sufficient for our
purposes, so we will not analyse the exceptional cases further.
                          HOMOMORPHISMS BETWEEN WEYL MODULES FOR SL3 (k)                                 13


Proof: We proceed by induction on e. When e = 1 we are done by the results in the preceding
section. Now suppose that e > 1. In what follows we shall assume when presenting lattices in
∇(µ) that µ is not too close to the edge of the dominant region. The reader may verify that the
modifications necessary in the remaining cases do not affect the form of the answer.
Case (i): Down alcoves. We will begin by consider the case when λ is as in Figure 1a(ii). There
are three subcases, corresponding to reflections about a wall to the left, right or below the alcove
containing λ. We consider a reflection to a weight µ to the right of λ (i.e. corresponding when
e = 1 to the map ∇(1) → ∇(2)) and denote the corresponding morphism (which will be unique up
to scalars once we know the Hom space is one-dimensional) by φ. The case of a reflection to the
left is similar, while that for a reflection below is even simpler; both are left to the reader.
   In the case under consideration µ lies in an up alcove, and corresponds to the situation in Figure
1b. We will renumber the alcoves in this latter diagram to be consistent with the numbering for
λ. That is, we will renumber the alcoves so that alcoves with the same number in each diagram
are in the same ∇p -class. Note that as e > 1 this numbering is different from that in Figure 1. If
λ is generic then this is unambiguous, and we will use the same labelling in the non-generic case.
The new labelling is illustrated in Figure 4, together with the corresponding lattices. To avoid
confusion we will refer to a weight in W.λ in an alcove labelled i in the diagram for λ as λi and in
the diagram for µ as µ[λi ].

                                       λ             φ                 µ   2
                  9                                                                          5
                                       1                           3       6       1
                                   4       2                           9       4
          5   6   7   8   3                                                              9       4
                                   8       6                           7       8
                                       9
              4       2                                                                3 8   6   7   1
                               5       7       3                           5
                  1                                                                          2


                                                   Figure 4.
   If λ is non-generic then the only terms in the p-filtration which can lie in the same ∇p -class are
λ1 and λ7 , or λ3 and λ8 , or λ5 and λ6 . As we are considering the case in Figure 1a(ii), λ3 and λ8
are in distinct ∇p -classes. Also, for any λ, the terms in the p-filtration labelled by λ1 , λ4 and λ5
must lie in the kernel of φ as none of their composition factors lie above the socle of ∇p (λ2 ) (by
figure 1a) and some composition factor of ∇p (λ2 ) maps to the socle of ∇(µ) (as this is the only
factor in the same p-class as the lowest term in the filtration of ∇(µ)).
   In a similar fashion we see that the image of φ does not involve the terms in the p-filtration of
∇(µ) labelled by µ[λ1 ], µ[λ4 ] and µ[λ5 ], as the image of the head of ∇(λ) is a composition factor
of ∇p (λ9 ). Thus the six terms in the filtration of ∇(λ) that may survive under φ are in distinct
∇p -classes.
   By the above remarks, φ induces a (non-zero) map φ′ on the quotient of ∇(λ) by the submod-
ule with a filtration by ∇p (λ1 ), ∇p (λ4 ) and ∇p (λ5 ). We shall denote this quotient module by
∇(λ)/[λ1 , λ4 , λ5 ], and other quotients similarly. Now consider the restriction of φ′ to ∇p (λ2 ). As
this module is the only part of the filtration with any composition factors in common with those
of ∇p (µ[λ2 ]) (which contains the socle of ∇(µ)) and φ′ is non-zero, this restriction must also be
non-zero. Hence we obtain a non-zero map from ∇p (λ2 ) to ∇p (µ[λ2 ]). By (1) we have
                                                     ∼ Hom(∇(λ′′ ), ∇(µ[λ2 ]′′ )).
                          Hom(∇p (λ2 ), ∇p (µ[λ2 ])) =         2
A simple calculation shows that this latter pair of weights satisfy the conditions of Theorem 3.3
for e − 1. Using the inductive hypothesis this Hom-space is one-dimensional, and hence any such
homomorphism is unique (up to scalars). Therefore, by induction, we can describe the composi-
tion factors occurring in the image of such a homomorphism (up to the exceptional ambiguity in
Theorem 3.3). As the isomorphism of Hom-spaces is induced by the map V 7−→ V F ⊗ L(λ′2 ), we
can thus describe the composition factors occurring in the image of our restriction of φ′ .
  We next consider the map obtained by following φ by the quotient map from ∇(µ) which kills
∇p (µ[λ2 ]). As the image under φ of ∇p (λ2 ) is killed by this quotient map, this induces a map φ
14                                    ANTON COX AND ALISON PARKER


from ∇(λ)/[λ1 , λ2 , λ4 , λ5 ] to ∇(µ)/[µ[λ2 ]]. We wish to argue as above and show that the restriction
of φ to each of the submodules ∇p (λi ), for i ∈ {3, 6, 7, 8}, can be determined by induction from
a reflection about an (e − 1)-wall. For this it is enough to show that the restriction is non-zero,
as then the argument given above also holds in this case. Once we have shown this, the only
remaining factor in ∇(λ) is ∇p (λ9 ) and a similar argument to the above shows that φ induces a
(non-zero) map from this factor to ∇p (µ[λ9 ]), which again can be determined by induction.
   Thus it only remains to show that the map induced on ∇p (λi ) is non-zero for i ∈ {3, 6, 7, 8}.
Suppose that this map is zero, and hence that this factor is in the kernel of the original map φ.
As the image under φ of ∇p (λ2 ) is non-zero, and this latter module has a simple head, this head
must survive. Hence the submodule Ei of ∇(λ)/[λ1 , λ4 , λ5 ] with a filtration by ∇p (λ2 ) and ∇p (λi )
must have a non simple head. We will show that the head is always simple, contradicting our
assumption that the induced map is zero.
   When i = 3 (respectively i = 7) the head of Ei is simple as there is a p-good homomorphism into
∇(λ) from some ∇(τ ) (which has a simple head) such that the image contains Ei as a quotient. For
the remaining cases will imitate an argument in [21, pages 360-1]. As the head of Ei can contain at
most two simple modules, it will be enough by [17, II, 3.16 (3)] to show that HomG1 (Ei , L(λ′2 )) = 0.
From the defining sequence for Ei (and writing L = L(λ′2 )) we have the exact sequence
           0 → HomG1 (∇p (λi ), L) → HomG1 (Ei , L) → HomG1 (∇p (λ2 ), L) → Ext1G1 (∇p (λi ), L)
which by (2) and the fact that λ2 and λi are in distinct ∇p -classes gives
                                                          θ     1
                      0 → HomG1 (Ei , L) → ∆(λ′′∗ F    ′′∗ F           ′
                                              2 ) → ∆(λi ) ⊗ ExtG1 (L(λi ), L).

   Thus we will be done if we can show that θ is an embedding. First suppose that θ = 0. Then
HomG1 (Ei , L) = ∆(λ′′∗   F
                       2 ) and this implies that Ei is semisimple as a G1 -module. By [17, II,
3.16 (3)] we see that socG (Ei ) is not simple, which contradicts the fact that Ei embeds in ∇(λ2 ).
Therefore we must have that θ 6= 0. To show that θ is an embedding, we will show that
                            θ∗(−1) : ∇(λ′′i ) ⊗ (Ext1G1 (L(λ′i ), L)(−1) )∗ → ∇(λ′′2 )              (8)
is onto.
   When i = 6 the results of Yehia [22] summarised in [21, Proposition 4.1] give that the Ext1 -
group in (8) is isomorphic to k, and λ′′6 = λ′′2 . As Hom(∇(λ′′6 ), ∇(λ′′2 )) ∼
                                                                              = k we deduce that θ is an
embedding.
       When i = 8, [21, Proposition 4.1] gives that the Ext1 -group in (8) is isomorphic to ∇(1, 0)F and
λ′′2   = (a, b − 1), λ′′8 = (a − 1, b) for some a, b > 0. Thus θ∗(−1) is in
                 Hom(∇(a − 1, b) ⊗ ∇(1, 0)∗ , ∇(a, b − 1))
                                   ∼
                                   = Hom(∇(a − 1, b), ∇(1, 0) ⊗ ∇(a, b − 1))
                                   ∼
                                   = Hom(∇(a − 1, b), pr(a−1,b) ∇(1, 0) ⊗ ∇(a, b − 1))              (9)
                                   ∼                       (a−1,b)
                                   = Hom(∇(a − 1, b), T(a,b−1) ∇(a, b − 1)) ∼
                                                                            =k
                                                      (a−1,b)
where the final isomorphism follows because T(a,b−1) ∇(a, b − 1) ∼
                                                                 = ∇(a − 1, b) (as b 6≡ 0 (mod p)).
But there is an obvious surjection in the Hom-space containing θ∗(−1) , as ∇(a − 1, b) ⊗ ∇(1, 0)∗
has a good filtration with quotient ∇(a, b − 1), and hence θ∗(−1) is surjective as required.
   Next consider the cases when either a′′ ≡ 0 (mod p) or b′′ ≡ 0 (mod p). It is easy to see that
the argument above is unaffected by the former, so we only need consider the case b′′ ≡ 0 (mod p).
We are in the situation where λ is as in Figure 1a(iii) and µ is as in Figure 1b(iii).
  Just as above, we consider the map induced by φ on various subquotients of ∇(λ). Everything
goes through unchanged except for the cases involving ∇p (λ3 ) and ∇p (λ8 ).
   Let ∇p (τ, ν) denote a non-split extension of ∇p (ν) by ∇p (τ ), and similarly for ∇(τ, ν). (We will
only apply this notation in situations where the extension is unique.) By assumption, we have to
consider the map induced by φ from ∇p (λ8 , λ3 ) to ∇p (µ[λ3 ], µ[λ8 ]). By Lemma 6.2 this notation
is well-defined, and each of the modules has simple socle. Arguing as in the generic case we see
                            HOMOMORPHISMS BETWEEN WEYL MODULES FOR SL3 (k)                            15


that the restriction of φ to ∇p (λ3 ) must be non-zero. (It is clearly non-zero on ∇p (λ8 ).) There
is an obvious homomorphism from ∇p (λ8 , λ3 ) to ∇p (µ[λ3 ], µ[λ8 ]) induced by the Carter-Payne
homomorphism from ∇(λ′′8 ) to ∇(µ[λ8 ]′′ ). But the restriction of this map to ∇p (λ3 ) is zero, and
hence it cannot be the map we require. Thus the map induced by φ on ∇(λ′′8 ) cannot be the
twist of the corresponding Carter-Payne map. As the socle of ∇p (µ[λ3 ], µ[λ8 ]) is simple it is clear
that the same is true of the map induced by φ on ∇(λ′′3 ). This completes the proof in the case of
reflection to the right from a down alcove. Clearly, reflection to the left is entirely analogous.
   For the reflection φ below λ the argument is much more straightforward. The only term in the
p-filtration of ∇(λ) which can survive under φ is ∇p (λ9 ), and this must map into ∇p (µ[λp ]). This
map is induced by a Carter-Payne map from ∇(λ′′9 ) to ∇(µ[λ9 ]′′ ), and hence is known by induction.
Case (ii): Up alcoves. We begin by considering reflection to the right of λ. As in case (i), we
renumber the terms in the p-filtration of ∇(µ) by their ∇p -classes with respect to ∇(λ). (Again
we use the generic labelling even in the non-generic case.) This is illustrated in Figure 5 (in the
generic case).


                                            λ           φ             µ
                3                       4                                                 2
                                1       8       6                      6 4
            2       9               2       9                        9            3   8   5 7     1
                                    5       7                        7 2 8
        1   7   8 5     6                                                             9       4
                                        3                        3     5     1
                4                                                                         6


                                                    Figure 5.

   If λ is generic then arguing as in case (i) we see that all but the terms labelled by λ3 , λ6 and
λ9 must lie in the kernel of φ, and the image is contained in the submodule filtered by the terms
labelled by µ[λ3 ], µ[λ6 ], and µ[λ9 ]. Arguing as in case (i) we see that φ is non-zero on each of the
three subquotients, and corresponds to a Carter-Payne map from ∇(λ′′i ) to ∇(µ[λi ]′′ ), which are
known by induction.
   We wish to argue that the same is true in the non-generic case. Here it is possible that the
term labelled by λ5 may survive under φ, and/or the term labelled by µ[λ8 ] may contain part of
the image. In the former case we must have that ∇p (λ5 ) maps into ∇p (µ[λ6 ]) (not ∇p (µ[λ5 ]) as
this would contradict the fact that the image of ∇(λ) has simple head). This implies the existence
of a non-zero homomorphism from ∇(λ′′5 ) to ∇(µ[λ6 ]′′ ). But µ[λ6 ]′′ 6≤ λ′′5 , so this is impossible.
Similarly, if µ[λ8 ] intersects im φ then this corresponds to a non-zero homomorphism from ∇(λ′′3 )
to ∇(µ[λ8 ]′′ ), but µ[λ8 ]′′ 6≤ λ′′3 . Thus the same argument as for the generic case holds here.
   So far each of the cases we have considered has corresponded to the corresponding result when
e = 1. However we shall see in the next case, the reflection below an up alcove, that this is not
always the case. Let λ be in an up alcove, and φ be a reflection below λ. In Figure 6 we have (as
usual) labelled the terms in the p-filtrations using the generic labels for λ.


                                            λ           φ             µ
                3                       4                                                 4
                                1       8       6                      3
            2       9               2       9                      2   9          1   7   8 5     6
                                    5       7                      5 4 7
        1   7   8 5     6                                                             2       9
                                        3                        1   8   6
                4                                                                         3


                                                    Figure 6.

   In the generic case we see that φ must kill all but the top quotient ∇p (λ3 ), and corresponds to
a Carter-Payne map from ∇(λ′′3 ) to ∇(µ[λ3 ]′′ ). Note that this differs from the case e = 1, when
four terms in the filtration survive. Clearly this map also exists in the non-generic case, but we
16                                      ANTON COX AND ALISON PARKER


also have the possibility that (as for e = 1) the terms labelled by λ2 , λ3 , λ8 and λ9 are not in the
kernel of φ.
   This would contradict the one-dimensionality of Hom-spaces, but we cannot use this to eliminate
the possibility as we have not established that result for ∇(λ) at this stage. However, such a
map would induce a non-zero homomorphism from ∇p (λ3 ) to ∇p (µ[λ8 ]), and hence a non-zero
homomorphism from ∇(λ′′3 ) to ∇(µ[λ8 ]′′ ). As we are in the non-generic case, it is easy to verify
that γ = λ′′3 and ν = µ[λ8 ]′′ satisfy the conditions in Assumption 5.2. Hence this homomorphism
cannot exist, as Assumption 5.2 follows from the results in Sections 7–9 which we know holds
for weights smaller that λ by induction. Therefore there are no extra homomorphisms in the
non-generic case.

                                                     λ           4
                                                 1
                           φL                        4
                                                         3   2       3         φR
                                             2
                                                                 1

                                4                                                           2
                                           φB
                                                                               3    1
               1                                                           4
                       2    3       2                                                   1       4
                   4                                                           2
           3
                                1                                                           3
                                                                 1
                                                     4
                                             2 1             2       3
                                                         3
                                                                 4


                                                   Figure 7.

Case (iii): Diagonal walls. We shall consider the case where λ lies on a wall as in Figure 7; the
other case is symmetric. As usual there are three possible maps from ∇(λ): to the left (φL ), right
(φR ) and below (φB ). As usual we label the terms in the p-filtration of the target module ∇(µ)
by their (generic) ∇p -classes with respect to the labelling of ∇(λ). The three cases are illustrated
in Figure 7, in the generic case.
   When λ is generic it is easy to verify as above that reflections to the right (respectively below)
correspond to Carter-Payne maps (which are known by induction) from the two (respectively one)
term(s) in the p-filtration that survive under the corresponding e = 1 map. The same is true for
reflection to the left provided one realises that the corresponding e = 1 map here is the identity
morphism, i.e that all four terms survive.
   For non-generic λ the same results hold, but the proofs require more care. First consider
reflection to the right. The only possible difference here is that ∇p (λ2 ) might survive under φR .
However, µ[λ3 ]′′ 6≤ λ′′2 , and so this is impossible (as in the case of reflection to the right from an
up alcove).
   Next consider reflection to the left. The argument here is just as for the corresponding reflection
from a down alcove.
   Finally, the argument for reflections below λ is unchanged in the non-generic case, as the only
pair of terms in the p-filtration which might be affected are already in the kernel of the map.
Case (iv): Horizontal walls. We conclude by considering the case where λ lies on a horizontal
wall as in Figure 8. As usual there are three possible maps: to the left (φL ), right (φR ) and below
(φB ). As in the previous cases we number the terms in the p-filtration of ∇(µ) by their (generic)
∇p -classes with respect to the labelling for ∇(λ). By symmetry we only need consider reflections
to the right and below.
   As in the preceding case, when λ is generic it is routine to verify that reflections to the right
correspond to Carter-Payne maps from the two terms in the p-filtration that survive under the
                          HOMOMORPHISMS BETWEEN WEYL MODULES FOR SL3 (k)                                                     17


                                                      λ
                                                 1                          4
                          φL                              2                                         φR
                                           3                         2           3

                                                 4                          1
                               2                                                                                     3
                  3                     φB                                                      2
                                                                                                        1
          1                1       4                                                                          4          1
              2                                                                                     3
                      4                                                                     4
                               3                                            1                                        2
                                                 4
                                           3          2              2           3

                                                 1
                                                                            4


                                               Figure 8.

corresponding e = 1 map. For reflections below the map corresponds to the Carter-Payne map
from the top term of the p-filtration of ∇(λ) into ∇p (µ).
   When λ is non-generic and φ is a reflection to the right or down then mimicking the argument
for the corresponding reflection from an up alcove in case (ii) we see that the result is the same as
in the generic case.                                                                               
   We wish to determine when the composition of two Carter-Payne homomorphisms is non-zero.
To describe this it will be convenient to introduce the following notation. Given a weight λ, we
denote by ∇p (λ̃) the term in the p-filtration of ∇(λ) containing the head of ∇(λ). (Note that if
λ = pλ′′ + λ′ where λ′′ = (a, b) with a > 0 and b > 0, then λ̃ = p(λ′′ − ρ) + wa λ′ where wa λ′ is the
reflection of λ′ in the horizontal wall immediately above the origin.)
  Recall that for a dominant weight λ, we let φiL (respectively φiR , φiB ) denote the Carter-Payne
homomorphism from ∇(λ) about a pi -wall to the left of (respectively to the right of, below) λ.
Recall further that in using this notation we always chose i minimal for the given wall. If we do
not wish to specify explicitly the direction of the reflection, we will replace L, R, B in the above
by †, and similarly the degree i of a wall by ∗. If the degree has to be strictly greater than 1,
we replace the ∗ by > 1. Given a composition θt · · · θ1 of homomorphisms, we shall refer to any
composition of the form θu · · · θ1 with u < t as a subcomposition of the given composition.
    We next define for each type of facet a set of maximal compositions. (The reason for this
terminology will become clear in the next corollary.) Given a weight λ, we define the product
θt · · · θ1 , where each θi is of the form φ∗,i
                                            † , to mean the composite of the Carter-Payne maps
θi : ∇(λi ) → ∇(λi+1 ) where λ1 = λ and λi+1 is the weight µ such that the Carter-Payne map
φ∗,i              i
  † from ∇(λ ) has image in ∇(µ). (Here we interpret any Carter-Payne map which starts in or
leaves the dominant region as the zero map.) Now the set max(λ) of maximal compositions for λ
depends on the type of facet in which λ lies:

                  λ                                       max(λ)
   Internal down alcove                 {φ∗B ,       φ∗R φ∗L φ∗R ,       φ∗L φ1B φ∗R , φ∗L φ∗R φ∗L , φ∗R φ1B φ∗L }
   Up alcove                            {φ∗B , φ∗L φ∗R , φ∗R φ>1 ∗    ∗ ∗     ∗ >1 ∗     ∗ 1     ∗ 1
                                                              L φR , φR φL , φL φR φL , φR φB , φL φB }

   RH just dominant down alcove         {φ∗R φ>1   ∗
                                              L , φL }

   LH just dominant down alcove         {φ∗L φ>1   ∗
                                              R , φR }

   Horizontal wall                      {φ∗B , φ∗R φ∗L φ∗R , φ∗L φ∗R φ∗L }
   RH diagonal wall                     {φ∗L φ∗B , φ∗L φ∗R φ∗L , φ∗R φ∗L φ∗R , φ∗L φ∗B φ∗R }
   LH diagonal wall                     {φ∗R φ∗B , φ∗R φ∗L φ∗R , φ∗L φ∗R φ∗L , φ∗R φ∗B φ∗L }
18                                 ANTON COX AND ALISON PARKER


   The following corollary allows us to determine inductively when a composite of Carter-Payne
maps can be non-zero. As all ∇(λ) have simple head, condition (i) is clearly both necessary and
sufficient. However, the content of this lemma is that we can impose the additional condition (ii).
Corollary 6.4. Let λ1 , . . . , λu be a sequence of distinct dominant weights such that for each i we
have a Carter-Payne homomorphism φ∗,i              i
                                           † : ∇(λ ) → ∇(λ
                                                              i+1
                                                                  ). Then the composite φ∗,u      ∗,1
                                                                                         † · · · φ†   is
non-zero if and only if both
     (i) the induced homomorphism
                                  φ∗,u      ∗,1     f1         u f1
                                   † · · · φ† : ∇p (λ ) → ∇p (λ [λ ])
          is non-zero, and
     (ii) the composite φ∗,u       ∗,1
                          † · · · φ†   is a subcomposition of a composition in max(λ).

Proof: As noted above, the first condition is itself both necessary and sufficient. That the second
condition must also be satisfied for a composite to be non-zero follows in most cases from the
description of maps via p-factors in Proposition 6.3. By considering each case in turn, we see that
        f1 ]) is never one of the terms in the p-filtration of ∇(λi ) for which any ambiguity remains
∇p (λu [λ
in our description of the Carter-Payne homomorphisms from ∇(λi ).
    There are a few additional cases which are not eliminated by the p-factor description in Propo-
sition 6.3. In the cases where λ1 lies on a diagonal wall we can eliminate the additional possibility
of two consecutive reflections in the same direction by reducing to the SL2 case using (1) and [11,
(4.3) Corollary], where the required Hom-spaces have been calculated in [6, Theorem 5.1]. Finally,
for left-hand (respectively right-hand) diagonal walls we must eliminate the possibility of a com-
posite of the form φ∗R φ∗L φ∗R φ∗L (respectively φ∗L φ∗R φ∗L φ∗R ). But for such a map to exist there must
be a corresponding composite on ∇p (λ̃), which is impossible by the above description of max(µ)
for each possible type of µ and induction on the sum of the degrees of the maps in the quartet. 
Remark 6.5. The induced morphism in Corollary 6.4(i) corresponds to a composite of Carter-
Payne homomorphisms
                               ∇(λf1 ′′ ) → ∇(λu [λ
                                                  f1 ]′′ )
which has already been determined by induction.

   We will take advantage of the notation used for elements in max(λ) to talk about maps starting
from differing weights. Given two weights λ and τ and a composite of Carter-Payne maps φ =
φ∗,u       ∗,1                                 ∗,u      ∗,1                ∗,i  ∗,i
  † · · · φ† from ∇(λ), we shall call the map θ† · · · θ† from ∇(τ ) with θ† = φ† for all 1 ≤ i ≤ u
the map from ∇(τ ) corresponding to φ.

                    7. Determining homomorphisms I: interior weights

   Suppose that λ is not in the lower closure of a just dominant (up or down) alcove. If λ is on a
vertex then all homomorphisms are known inductively by (1), so we shall henceforth assume that
this is not the case. In Section 4 and Theorem 5.1 we observed that there was an obvious upper
bound Υλ for the set of weights µ for which there exist homomorphisms from ∇(λ) to ∇(µ). In
this section we will refine these sets to give a precise description of when homomorphisms occur,
in most cases. The remaining, exceptional cases will be dealt with in Section 9. Those λ not of
the form above will be considered in Section 8.
   We will hereafter identify weights with the facets in which they lie — and (when we have
a particular linkage class in mind) vice versa — and simple modules with their labels. Before
continuing further, we note a convenient property of the vertex weights that simplifies certain
verifications. We will wish to argue inductively from weights at vertices in our facet diagrams. For
any such weight θ of the form θ = pθ′′ + (p − 1)ρ we will need to consider the set of weights τ
such that there is a non-zero homomorphism from ∇(θ) to ∇(τ ). In principle to calculate such
homomorphisms we need to consider θ′′ and its images under the dot action of Wp (and thus reflect
our weights in a different shifted set of hyperplanes). However, as this corresponds to translation
                       HOMOMORPHISMS BETWEEN WEYL MODULES FOR SL3 (k)                                    19


by ρ (and we have rescaled) we can determine the weights τ by using the ordinary dot action of
Wp2 on θ itself.
  It will be convenient in what follows to have the following easy consequence of the definition of
max(λ) and the associated Corollary 6.4.
Lemma 7.1. Let λ, µ, and ν be dominant weights such that there exist Carter-Payne maps
φaL : ∇(λ) → ∇(µ) and φbR : ∇(µ) → ∇(ν) for some a, b > 0. Then the composite map
                                          φbR φaL : ∇(λ) → ∇(ν)
is non-zero. A similar result holds with the roles of left and right reversed.

Proof: It is enough to consider the case where λ does not lie on a vertex. Regardless of the type
of the facet containing λ, the map φbR φaL occurs as a subcomposition of an element in max(λ), by
inspection (and the dominance of µ). Hence by Corollary 6.4 it is enough to show that the map
from ∇p (λ̃) to ∇p (ν[λ̃]) is non-zero. But λ̃′′ and ν[λ̃]′′ are also related by a map of the form φ∗R φ∗L ,
and hence the result follows by induction on a + b.                                                      
   Suppose θ ∈ X + is a vertex weight. We refer to the closure of the hexagon surrounding θ, as
the neighbourhood of θ (see Figure 9(a)). We refer to the open star surrounding θ as the extended
neighbourhood of θ (see Figure 9(b)).


                             (a)                       (b)

                                θ                            θ



                                               Figure 9.

   The local composition pattern associated to a weight µ is the collection of elements of Wp .µ
labelling terms in a p-filtration of ∇(µ). If µ ∈ Wp2 .λ and L(µ) is a composition factor of ∇(λ),
then these weights are generically composition factors of ∇(λ) which may be seen be using the
p-filtration of ∇(λ).
   For a non-vertex weight λ ∈ X + and a vertex weight θ ∈ X + , we say a dominant weight is a θ-
translate for ∇(λ) if it corresponds to a composition factor of ∇(λ) and it lies in the neighbourhood
of θ, if λ lies in the closure of a down alcove, and the extended neighbourhood of θ if λ lies in an
up alcove.
   Let λ be in the closure of an interior down alcove and let η the vertex below λ. We wish to
define a set of eligible θ-translates for ∇(λ). Unfortunately the definition is complicated slightly
when η is on a p2 -wall or p2 -vertex, so we first consider the remaining (i.e. p2 -regular) cases.
   Let θ be another vertex dominated by η and with θ = w.η where w ∈ Wp2 . The eligible
θ-translates for ∇(λ) are those highest weights corresponding to composition factors which are
θ-translates for ∇(λ), and which occur in the local composition pattern for µ = w.λ. Note that
each of these factors lies in the same ∇p -class as some weight labelling the p-filtration of ∇(λ).
   When η is not p2 -regular the element w in the definition above is no longer unique. Let w be
the element of Wp2 corresponding to the shortest sequence of reflections taking η to θ. Now the
eligible θ-translates for ∇(λ) are those highest weights corresponding to composition factors which
are θ-translates for ∇(λ), and which occur in the local composition pattern either for µ = w.λ. or
for some µ− where µ− ≤ µ is obtained from µ by a sequence of reflections in Wp2 all of which fix
θ.
   We have illustrated the six configurations of eligible θ-translates that will be of interest to us
in Figure 10 for the case of λ in the interior of the alcove or on a left-hand diagonal wall. In both
these cases the case of η non-p2 -regular gives the same result as the regular case. In both cases the
20                                ANTON COX AND ALISON PARKER


vertex θ is indicated by a dot. For the alcove case the weight denoted µ in the preceding paragraph
is in the highest alcove of the cluster of alcoves drawn (which represents the corresponding local
composition pattern), and the unshaded alcoves in each configuration are those containing eligible
θ-translates. For the wall case µ lies on the highest marked wall (the markings represent the
corresponding local composition pattern), and the marked walls contained in the unshaded region
are those containing eligible θ-translates. The right-hand diagonal wall case is symmetric, while
the eligible θ-translates in the horizontal wall case are illustrated with bold walls in Figure 13 for
η p2 -regular. For η non-p2 -regular the only modifications occur in cases (a) (b) and (c), which are
illustrated in Figure 14 for µ a p2 -vertex; the p2 -wall cases are similar.

                                            (a)

                        (b)                                                (c)




                       (d)                                                  (e)

                                              (f)




                                             Figure 10.

   Note that if ν is the lowest vertex in the closure of the alcove containing λ, with a homomorphism
from ∇(ν) to ∇(θ), then the set of eligible θ-translates in ∇(λ) is a subset of Υλ . The next Theorem
shows that the sets of eligible θ-translates provide the appropriate refinement of this set.
Theorem 7.2. Suppose τ is a vertex and we have a composite of Carter-Payne maps ∇(τ ) → ∇(θ).
If λ lies in the closure of the down alcove with lower vertex τ , and µ ∈ W.λ lies in the neighbourhood
of θ then
                                         Hom(∇(λ), ∇(µ)) 6= 0
if and only if µ is an eligible θ-translate in ∇(λ). Further, if there is a non-zero homomorphism
then it is either a composite of Carter-Payne maps or a twisted map.

Proof: We consider the case where η is p2 -regular; the remaining cases are easy modifications
which are left to the reader. We will also only consider the case where λ lies in the interior of the
down alcove; the remaining wall cases are similar, and are also left as an exercise for the reader.
Note that λ and θ are such that we are in one of the 6 configurations illustrated in Figure 10 (a)
to (f) (but it is not necessarily the case that all alcoves occurring in the local composition pattern
of µ correspond to composition factors of ∇(λ)). We begin by showing that there exist suitable
maps for each eligible θ-translate.
   As λ is in a down alcove, it is easy to verify that if µ is the lowest eligible θ-translate (i.e. the
one immediately below θ) then it is a composition factor of ∇p (λ̃). Further, the existence of a map
from ∇(τ ) to ∇(θ) immediately implies that there is a map from ∇p (λ̃) to ∇p (µ) (as they both
come from taking the map from ∇(τ ′′ ) to ∇(θ′′ ), twisting by F , and tensoring both sides with an
appropriate simple module). Thus if µ is the lowest eligible θ-translate then there is a twisted map
from ∇(λ) to ∇(µ).
                                HOMOMORPHISMS BETWEEN WEYL MODULES FOR SL3 (k)                                  21


    Next suppose that µ is the highest eligible θ-translate. We will show that the desired map can
be constructed as a composite of Carter-Payne maps using Corollary 6.4. In this case µ is obtained
from λ by the same sequence of reflections used to obtain θ from τ . Write τ = (pi −1)ρ+pi τ (i) where
τ (i) does not lie on a vertex. Then the sequence of reflections used must label a subcomposition
of a composition in max(τ (i) ) by Corollary 6.4 (though the maps will have different superscripts).
If the same subcomposition also occurs as a subcomposition of a composition in max(λ) then the
first condition in Corollary 6.4 is satisfied; by the argument in the previous paragraph, the second
condition is also satisfied, and hence there is a non-zero composite of Carter-Payne maps from
∇(λ) to ∇(µ).
   Thus it only remains to consider the cases where a subcomposition φ of an element in max(τ (i) )
does not also occur as a subcomposition of an element in max(λ). By inspection we see that the
following cases need to be considered:

     (i)   τ (i)   lies   in a down alcove and φ is one of φ∗R φ1B φ∗L , φ1B φ∗L , φ∗L φ1B φ∗R , or φ1B φ∗R .
    (ii)   τ (i)   lies   in an up alcove and φ = φ∗R φ1B or φ∗L φ1B .
   (iii)   τ (i)   lies   on a right-hand diagonal wall and φ = φ∗L φ∗B , φ∗L φ∗B φ∗R , or φ∗B φ∗R .
   (iv)    τ (i)   lies   on a left-hand diagonal wall and φ = φ∗R φ∗B , φ∗R φ∗B φ∗L , or φ∗B φ∗L .

   In each case we will show that there is a second non-zero composite of Carter-Payne maps from
τ to θ which does occur as a subcomposition of an element of max(λ). As we know that there is
(up to scalars) a unique map from ∇(τ ) to ∇(θ) this new map must coincide with the original one,
and the arguments of the preceding paragraph will then apply to this new map to give the desired
composite map from λ to µ. In what follows all equalities of maps should be interpreted as being
up to some non-zero scalar multiple.
   Consider first case (i), with φ = φaR φ1B φbL for some a, b > 0. By Lemma 7.1 and the uniqueness of
maps we have that φ1B φbL = φbL φ1R , and hence φ = φaR φbL φ1R , which does occur as a subcomposition
of an element in max(λ). (Note that as φ is non-zero it follows that the conditions of Lemma 7.1
are satisfied.) Similar arguments hold for the other maps in case (i). Case (ii) is similar as, for
example, we have that φaR φ1B = φ1L φaR .
   Cases (iii) and (iv) are symmetric, so we only need consider (iii). We would like to argue as
in the preceding paragraph, but it is no longer obvious that in applications of Lemma 7.1 the
intermediate weight is dominant. Consider the case where φ = φaL φbB (the other cases are similar).
Consider the original map φ from ∇(τ ) to ∇(θ). By Corollary 6.4 there must be a corresponding
composite map from ∇p (τ̃ ), and hence from ∇(τ ′′ ). Repeating this argument for ∇(τ ′′ ) (and so
on), we deduce that the map must ultimately have come from some corresponding composite with
a or b equal to 1. By considering the possible cases (up alcove or RH diagonal wall) where such a
composite can arise, we see that we must have b ≤ a, and further that the map from λ of the form
φaL must be to a dominant weight. We have φbR φaL = φaL φbB from τ , and hence φ = φbR φaL . This is
an element of max(λ), and hence the argument above produces the desired map.
   The only remaining cases of eligible θ-translates occur in cases (a), (b) and (c) in Figure 10.
As above, the sequence of reflections relating τ and θ must be a subcomposition of some element
in max(τ ). By considering the various possible cases we see that a configuration as in case (b)
(respectively (c)) can only occur when θ is obtained from τ by a single reflection to the left
(respectively right), while for (a) we must have θ = τ . It is now easy to construct an explicit
composite of Carter-Payne maps for each of the remaining weights µ.
    For λ not too close to a p2 -wall we have shown that of the six alcoves in each cluster of possible
candidates for homomorphisms, either we have a morphism of the desired form or the alcove
contains no composition factor of ∇(λ). Thus in that case we are done. When λ is close to a
p2 -wall it is possible that some of the six alcoves in a cluster are generated as composition factors
of ∇(λ) by a weight on a vertex other than the one at the centre of the cluster. As long as we
can eliminate such alcoves as candidates for a homomorphism the argument will proceed for the
remaining alcoves just as above. We will consider the case where λ is close to a single p2 -wall; the
case where it is close to two such walls is very similar.
22                                 ANTON COX AND ALISON PARKER


            (a)                          (b)                              (c)
                    a                                   f
                                                                                        d
                              c                                                 c
                                                    a




                        (d)                                 (e)
                                     e                                c
                              f                                   µ

                                                                      e
                                                              ε
                                                                  δ


                                               Figure 11.

   If λ lies close to a p2 -wall, we see that the problem case can occur if there exist vertices θ1
and θ2 separated by a single wall such that θ1 > θ2 and there is a non-zero homomorphism
from ∇(τ ) to ∇(θ2 ). In this case it may be that there is a local composition pattern clustered
around θ1 formed from composition factors of ∇(λ), which intersects the neighbourhood of θ2 . The
various configurations that can occur (after using symmetry considerations to reduce the number
of cases) are shown in Figures 11 and 12. Here we label each of the local composition patterns
by the corresponding label in Figure 10 and shade in all but the θ1 - and θ2 -translates. Figure 11
corresponding to τ ′′ in a down alcove, and Figure 12 to τ ′′ in an up alcove (the other cases are
similar). By inspection, we see that the only cases where additional homomorphisms from ∇(λ)
to ∇(µ) might arise are when µ is as indicated in Figure 11(e) or Figure 12(b) or (e).
   In these cases we need to show that there is no homomorphism ∇(λ) → ∇(µ): once we have
done this we will have completed the proof for λ in the interior of a down alcove. So suppose there
is a homomorphism ∇(λ) → ∇(µ) with µ as shown. An easy calculation shows that the factor in
the p-filtration of ∇(µ) in the same ∇p -class as ∇p (λ̃) is ∇p (δ) where δ lies in the alcove shown. As
∇(λ) → ∇(µ) is non-zero, the head of ∇(λ) (i.e. the head of ∇p (λ̃)) must survive in the image as a
composition factor of ∇p (δ). But we have local homomorphisms ∇(µ) → ∇(ǫ) (where ǫ lies in the
dotted alcove shown) where all of ∇p (δ) survives. Therefore we obtain a non-zero homomorphism
∇(λ) → ∇(µ) → ∇(ǫ), which is impossible as L(ǫ) is not a composition factor of ∇(λ).                   
     We next want to similarly refine Υλ for λ in an up alcove using sets of eligible θ-translates.
   Let λ lie in an up alcove and η the vertex directly below it.(That is, η will be the centre of the
star with λ in the topmost alcove of the star.) We wish to define the set of eligible θ-translates for
∇(λ); just as in the down alcove case we begin by supposing that η is p2 -regular.
   Let θ be another vertex dominated by η with θ = w.η and w ∈ Wp2 . The eligible θ-translates for
∇(λ) are those weights corresponding to composition factors lying in the extended neighbourhood
of θ which occur in the local composition pattern for µ = w.λ. When η is not p2 -regular the
modifications are exactly as in the down alcove case.
   As in the down alcove case there are six configurations of eligible θ-translates that will be of
interest to us, and these are illustrated in Figure 13 for η p2 -regular. (These six configurations
may be superimposed if we are near a p2 -wall.) As before the vertex θ is indicated by a dot,
                      HOMOMORPHISMS BETWEEN WEYL MODULES FOR SL3 (k)                                 23


           (a)                       (b)                                       (c)
                                                       a                                   c
                 c                             µ                                     d
                            a
                                           ε               f
                                           δ


                      (d)                                  (e)
                                                                           e
                                f                                  µ
                            e
                                                               ε       c
                                                                   δ



                                               Figure 12.

the weight denoted µ in the preceding paragraph is in the highest alcove of the cluster of alcoves
drawn (which represents the corresponding local composition pattern), and the unshaded alcoves
in each configuration are those containing eligible θ-translates. The thick lines indicate the eligible
θ-translates for λ in the horizontal wall case, and are illustrated here for convenience later. For η
non-p2 -regular the only modifications occur in cases (a) (b) and (c), which are illustrated in Figure
14 for η a p2 -vertex (the p2 -wall cases being similar).

                                               (a)

                        (b)                                                          (c)
                                                     + +



                                                     (*)

                        (d)                                                          (e)
                                               (f)




                                               Figure 13.

   Unfortunately the up alcove analogue of Theorem 7.2 is a little more complicated than in the
down alcove case. We define an exceptional alcove for the pair (θ, λ) to be an alcove (∗) as in
Figures 13 or 14, when the relative positions of θ and the θ-eligible translates in ∇(λ) are as
shown. We now have
Theorem 7.3. Suppose τ is a vertex and we have a composite of Carter-Payne maps ∇(τ ) → ∇(θ̂).
Let λ lie in an up alcove, with ν on the horizontal wall below λ and τ the lower vertex in the closure
24                                            ANTON COX AND ALISON PARKER


                                                        (a)

                                    (b)                                               (c)
                                                              + +



                                                              (*)

                                                        Figure 14.

of the down alcove below ν. If we have a weight µ ∈ W.λ with µ in the extended neighbourhood of
θ̂ then
                                       Hom(∇(λ), ∇(µ)) 6= 0
if and only if there exists some weight θ satisfying the following four conditions:
      (1) There exists a non-zero composite of Carter-Payne maps ∇(τ ) → ∇(θ).
      (2) The weight µ is an eligible θ-translate in ∇(λ).
      (3) There is a non-zero homomorphism from ∇(ν) to ∇(δ) with δ on the wall in the closure
          of the alcove containing µ which lies in the boundary of the neighbourhood of θ.
      (4) The weight µ is not an exceptional weight for the pair (θ, λ).
Further, if there is a non-zero homomorphism then it is either a composite of Carter-Payne maps
or a twisted map.
Remark 7.4. (i) As we will see in the following proof, we must have θ = θ̂ unless λ is too close to
a p2 -wall (i.e. unless there are two vertices θ1 and θ2 with overlapping extended neighbourhoods
such that θ1 and θ2 are both in Wp2 .τ ).
(ii) Condition (3) eliminates the possibility of maps into the alcoves marked (+) in Figure 13 in
the generic case.

Proof: We proceed as in the proof of the last Theorem, and as in that proof we will only consider
the case where η is p2 -regular; the remaining cases are easy modifications which are left to the
reader. We begin by assuming that λ is not close to a p2 -wall, so that λ and θ are such that we
are in one of the six configurations illustrated in Figure 13 (a) to (f). We now consider the eligible
θ-translates.
   As in the preceding theorem, it is easy to verify that if µ is the lowest eligible θ-translate (i.e.
the down alcove below θ) then it is a composition factor of ∇p (λ̃). Just as before, we deduce that
there exists a twisted map from ∇(λ) to ∇(µ).
   Similarly, if µ is the highest eligible θ-translate, we wish to argue exactly as in the preceding
proof to show that there is a composite of Carter-Payne maps from ∇(λ) to ∇(µ). As there we
see that the only problem occurs when the composite of Carter-Payne maps from τ to θ does not
correspond to a subcomposition of an element of max(λ). With the notation used in the preceding
proof, it remains to consider the following cases:
       (i)   τ (i)   lies   in a down alcove and φ = φ∗R φ1B φ∗L or φ∗L φ1B φ∗R .
      (ii)   τ (i)   lies   in an up alcove and φ = φ∗R φ1B or φ∗L φ1B .
     (iii)   τ (i)   lies   on a right-hand diagonal wall and φ = φ∗L φ∗B or φ∗L φ∗B φ∗R .
     (iv)    τ (i)   lies   on a left-hand diagonal wall and φ = φ∗R φ∗B or φ∗R φ∗B φ∗L .
   As before, in each case we will construct a second non-zero composite of Carter-Payne maps
from τ to θ which does correspond to a subcomposite of an element from max(λ). The desired
maps then exist by the arguments in the preceding proof.
   Case (i) is straightforward, as there is only one eligible θ-translate. Thus the highest eligible
θ-translate is also the lowest, and we have already constructed the required map. Case (ii) is also
                      HOMOMORPHISMS BETWEEN WEYL MODULES FOR SL3 (k)                                25


easy, as we have that φaR φ1B = φ1L φaR (and similarly with the roles of left and right reversed), and
it is easy to see that this composite satisfies the conditions of Lemma 7.1.
   As the right-hand and left-hand wall cases are symmetric, we only need consider case (iii). If
φ = φaL φ1B we argue as in case (ii). If φ = φaL φbB φcR we have to be careful (as in the proof of
case (iii) in Theorem 7.2) that in applying Lemma 7.1 we have that the intermediate weight is
dominant. However, as before, we can deduce that the map must ultimately come from a map from
a right-hand diagonal or internal down alcove, and just as in the corresponding case in Theorem
7.2 we deduce that φbB φcR = φcR φbL , and hence that φ = φaL φcR φbL which corresponds to an element
in max(λ) as required.
   The only remaining cases of eligible θ-translates occur in cases (a), (b) and (c) in Figure 13. As
in the preceding proof, we see that a configuration as in case (b) (respectively (c)) can only occur
when θ is obtained from τ by a single reflection to the left (respectively right), while for (a) we
must have θ = τ .
   In case (a) we already know that there exist maps of the desired form into all alcoves except
those labelled (+). For each of these latter alcoves no map exists by translation arguments, as
there is no map from ∇(ν) to ∇(δ), with δ as in condition 3. (This case is the reason for this
condition in the Theorem, which eliminates these two possibilities.)
   For cases (b) and (c) it is now easy to construct an explicit composite of Carter-Payne maps
for each of the remaining weights µ, except for the exceptional weights labelled (∗). As these two
cases are symmetric we consider case (c), and must show that there is no non-zero map from ∇(λ)
to ∇(µ) when µ is the weight (∗). Consider the p-filtration for ∇(µ), using the labelling of factors
given in Figure 1a(i). If there were a non-zero map then the head of ∇(λ) must survive, and by
earlier arguments (and our assumption that λ is not near a p2 -wall) it must be a composition
factor in ∇p (µ8 ). As there is a map from ∇(µ) to ∇p (µ4 ) which does not kill any of ∇p (µ8 ), the
composite of this pair of maps would give a non-zero map from ∇(λ) to ∇(µ4 ). But L(µ4 ) is not
a composition factor of ∇(λ), which gives the desired contradiction.
   By our assumption on λ, the remaining weights in the extended neighbourhood of θ for which
we have not yet constructed maps are not composition factors of ∇(λ). Thus we are done in the
case where λ is not too close to a p2 -wall.
   It remains to consider the case where λ is close to a p2 -wall. If λ is close to only one p2 -wall
then the new configurations that can occur are illustrated in Figure 15 (for τ ′′ in a down alcove,
the wall cases are similar) and Figure 16 (for τ ′′ in an up alcove). Here the vertices are labelled
by the labels of the corresponding configurations in Figure 13, and all alcoves not in the extended
neighbourhood of one of the two marked vertices are shaded. When λ is close to two p2 -walls it is
easy to verify that the obvious modification of the arguments below (considering each p2 -wall case
separately, then superimposing them) holds.
   The construction of maps proceeds just as in the case considered above, with the understanding
that there may be two ‘highest’ eligible θ-translates: one for each local composition diagram when
a pair of such overlap. However, it remains to show that there are no additional maps into the
remaining unshaded alcoves in Figures 15 and 16.
   If there is a map from ∇(ν) to ∇(δ) in Figure 13 with δ and ν as in Condition 3 then the
alcove marked with a + must coincide with an exceptional alcove (marked (∗)) and so this map
is eliminated as in cases (b) and (c). For the alcove marked (∗) in Figure 13 the argument given
above only breaks down in the case shown in Figures 15(c) and 16(a). Consider first the former
case. The argument given above breaks down because µ4 (here labelled by δB ) is a composition
factor of ∇(λ). However, it will be enough to show that there is no map from ∇(λ) to ∇(δB ),
which is proved below.
   Next consider the case shown in Figure 16(a). For convenience we have redrawn this case in
Figure 17 with the labelling of the p-filtration for ∇(µ) shown and all other alcoves shaded. Here
we may no longer deduce that the head of ∇(λ) must be a composition factor of ∇p (µ8 ), as it
could also occur in ∇p (µ3 ). Suppose that this is the case. Then our map must induce a morphism
26                                  ANTON COX AND ALISON PARKER


         (a)                              (b)                                          (c)
                 a                                     f
                                                                                                           d
                            c                                                                    c             δC
                                                           a
                                                                                   δ

                                                                                       δB
                                                   δA
                                                                                                         (*)

                      (d)                                      (e)           c
                                    e
                            f                                            e                           δ




                                                Figure 15.


           (a)                      (b)                                      (c)
                                                   a                                                 c
                 c                                                                           d
                            a
          (*)                                          f




                     (d)        f                              (e)
                            e                                            e


                                                                     c



                                                Figure 16.


from ∇p (λ3 ) to ∇p (µ3 ), and hence there exists a map from ∇(λ′′3 ) to ∇(µ′′3 ). But these two weights
differ by a multiple of a single root and are not reflections of each other about a wall. Thus this
map cannot exist by [11, (3.6) Theorem and (4.3) Corollary]. Thus we see that the head of ∇(λ)
must be a composition factor of ∇p (µ8 ), and the argument given in the generic case goes through
unchanged.
  It remains to show that the unshaded alcoves in Figures 15 and 16 for which we have not yet
constructed maps do indeed have no maps into them. First suppose that there are maps from ∇(τ )
                      HOMOMORPHISMS BETWEEN WEYL MODULES FOR SL3 (k)                                 27




                                              4 1 2
                                              8
                                                96
                                            5   7   3




                                            Figure 17.

into both labelled vertices in a given configuration. Then the remaining cases to consider are the
alcoves labelled by Greek letters in Figures 15(b), (c) and (e).
   Those labelled simply by a δ clearly have no maps, as they fail condition (3) of the Theorem,
which is a necessary condition for a map to exist by the translation arguments in the proof of
Theorem 5.1. Next consider µ = δA , δB , or δC and suppose there is a non-zero map from ∇(λ)
to ∇(µ). In each case µ must be a composition factor of ∇p (λ4 ). Hence the head of ∇p (λ9 )
must survive under the map, as the submodule of ∇(λ) with ∇p -factors ∇p (λ4 ), ∇p (λ5 ), ∇p (λ6 ),
∇p (λ7 ), ∇p (λ8 ) and ∇p (λ9 ) has simple head. But there is no composition factor of ∇p (λ9 ) in ∇(µ)
as ∇(µ) does not contain this ∇p -class.
   Finally, we have to consider the case where there is a map from τ to just one of the two labelled
vertices in a given configuration. As for the cases labelled by δ’s above, an appeal to the necessary
condition (3) in the Theorem is enough to eliminate the remaining alcoves in most cases.
   However, two cases cannot be eliminated in this manner. These are the configuration shown in
Figure 15(b) when there is a map from τ only to vertex f , and the configuration shown in Figure
15(c) when there is map from τ only to vertex d. In each case we must eliminate the possibility of
a map to each of the alcoves adjacent to vertex f (respectively d).
   In case (b) it is easy to verify that the alcove is in the same ∇p -class as λ4 . Then arguing
as above we see that the head of ∇p (λ9 ) must survive in the image of any map, and thus the
composite of this map followed by a local reflection to the right would be non-zero. However, no
such map exists by our assumption.



                                                                  d
                                              c           6
                                                      9       4
                                                      7       8
                                                          2
                                                  3       5       1




                                            Figure 18.

   In case (c) the lower of the two alcoves has already been eliminated above. The remaining alcove
is marked 6 in Figure 18, where the numbering indicates the ∇p -class using the labelling for λ.
The structure of the p-filtrations of ∇(λ) and ∇(µ) are very similar to those shown on the left
(respectively right) sides of Figure 5 — except that in the latter case there is an extension of 3 by
8, as these are in the same ∇p -class. Any map from ∇(λ) must preserve the head of ∇p (λ3 ), and
its image must lie in the term in the p-filtration of ∇(µ) corresponding to the alcove marked 3 or
8.
   If this composition factor lies in ∇p (µ[λ8 ]) then composing the map with the local reflection to
the right gives a non-zero map to ∇(µ[λ4 ]), which contradicts the arguments above. Hence the
image of ∇(λ) under our map must be in the submodule of ∇(µ) with p-filtration labelled by µ[λ3 ],
28                                ANTON COX AND ALISON PARKER


µ[λ6 ], and µ[λ9 ]. But then the composite of our map with the obvious quotient map to ∇p (µ[λ3 ])
must be non-zero, which implies the existence of a non-zero map from ∇(λ) to ∇(µ[λ3 ]). However,
no such map exists by our assumption.                                                          
   For twisted maps, the analogue of Theorems 7.2 and 7.3 is in most cases much more straight-
forward.
Theorem 7.5. Suppose τ is a vertex and we have a twisted map ∇(τ ) → ∇(θ). Let λ lie in the
closure of the down alcove with lower vertex τ , or in an up alcove with ν on the horizontal wall
below λ and τ the lower vertex in the closure of the down alcove below ν. Write τ = (pi − 1)ρ + τ +
where τ + is not a vertex weight. If τf
                                      + = p((τ + )′′ − 1)ρ + w ((τ + )′ ) then
                                                              a

                                        Hom(∇(λ), ∇(µ)) 6= 0
if and only if µ is an eligible θ-translate in ∇(λ). Further, if there is a non-zero homomorphism
then it is twisted map.

Proof: By our assumption on τ , the existence of a twisted map from ∇(τ ) to ∇(θ) implies that the
θ-eligible factors of ∇(λ) are in one of the configurations (f) in Figures 10 and 13. As in both these
cases there is only one eligible factor µ (which is thus the lowest such) the proof of the existence of
a (necessarily twisted) map follows just as in the corresponding case in Theorems 7.2 and 7.3. 
   The assumption in the preceding Theorem that τ can be written in the form τ = (pi − 1)ρ + τ +
where τ + is not a vertex weight only fails to hold when τ + is close to the boundary of the dominant
region. For such weights a twisted map from ∇(τ ) to ∇(θ) will give rise to the first of our exceptional
maps, as well as the twisted maps in Theorem 7.5. We return to this problem in Section 9, after
we have considered those weights λ not of the form considered in Theorems 7.2–7.5.

                8. Determining homomorphisms II: just dominant weights

   We next turn our attention to weights λ for which the methods of the previous section do not
apply. We first consider the case where λ is in the closure of a down alcove whose lower vertex is
non-dominant. By the translation principle, we may assume that λ = (a, 0) or (0, b). It is easy
to show (cf. [17, II, 2.16]) that ∇(a, 0) ∼
                                          = S a (V ), where V is the natural module for SL3 (k), and
the submodule structure of these has been determined by Doty [10]. We will use (and refine) the
reinterpretation of these results in [5].
            Pm
   Let a = i=0 ai pi where 0 ≤ ai ≤ p − 1 for all i and am 6= 0. Doty gives a procedure for
defining a set C(a) of m-tuples of nonnegative integers (called carry patterns) which is in one-to-
one correspondence with the set of composition factors of S a (V ). Further, if we impose a poset
structure on C(a) by setting c ≤ d if ci ≤ di for all i then this correspondence induces a lattice
isomorphism from the lattice of order closed subsets of C(a) to the lattice of submodules of S d (V ).
Doty’s construction is purely arithmetic; we will use the alcove theoretic version given in [5].
   Recall that in [5, Figure 5] each type of alcove that can contain a composition factor of S a (V )
was associated to either 0, 1 or 2. We will extend this procedure to walls: we reproduce the
correspondence between alcoves and integers in Figure 19, and extend it to the wall cases as
shown. Note that in the new cases the numbering depends on the type of wall containing λ.
   We now recall the recursive procedure for determining composition factors of ∇(λ) given in [5],
in the special case where ∇(λ) is a symmetric power. (This allows certain simplifications to be
made.) As this is a little complicated, an example will be given below. The algorithm starts by
finding the largest i such that λ does not lie in the closure of the lowest pi -alcove. By regarding
the facets shown in Figure 19 as pi -facets, we let cf(λ, i) be the set of weights obtained from λ
by intersecting Wpi .λ with the configuration of pi -facets corresponding to the position of λ. (The
weight λ will always occur in this set.) In this first iteration of the algorithm the configuration
containing λ will be one with a shaded region to the right of it.
   For the inductive step, we construct a new set cf(λ, i − 1) from cf(λ, i). For each weight µ in
cf(λ, i) we consider the unique translate of the set of pi−1 -restricted weights which contains µ and
                      HOMOMORPHISMS BETWEEN WEYL MODULES FOR SL3 (k)                                  29

                             1111111111111
                             0000000000000
                             0000000000000
                             1111111111111                      1111111111111
                                                                0000000000000
                                                                0000000000000
                                                                1111111111111
                             0000000000000
                             1111111111111                      0000000000000
                                                                1111111111111
                             0000000000000
                             1111111111111
                                    1
                             0000000000000
                             1111111111111
                                                            1   0000000000000
                                                                1111111111111
                                                                0000000000000
                                                                1111111111111
                                                                               1

                 1           0000000000000
                             1111111111111
                             0000000000000
                             1111111111111      0
                                                                0000000000000
                                                                1111111111111
                                                                0000000000000
                                                                1111111111111
                                        2                                0
                             0000000000000
                             1111111111111                      0000000000000
                                                                1111111111111
                                                                 2
                             0000000000000
                             1111111111111
                             0000000000000
                             1111111111111                      0000000000000
                                                                1111111111111
                                                                0000000000000
                                                                1111111111111
                             0000000000000
                             1111111111111
                                      0
                             0000000000000
                             1111111111111                      0000000000000
                                                                1111111111111
                                                                           2
                                                                0000000000000
                                                                1111111111111
                             0000000000000
                             1111111111111                      0000000000000
                                                                1111111111111
                             0000000000000
                             1111111111111
                             0000000000000
                             1111111111111                      0000000000000
                                                                1111111111111
                                                                0000000000000
                                                                1111111111111
                 0           0000000000000
                             1111111111111
                             0000000000000
                             1111111111111
                                                                0000000000000
                                                                1111111111111
                                                                0000000000000
                                                                1111111111111
                             0000000000000
                             1111111111111                      0000000000000
                                                                1111111111111
                             0000000000000
                             1111111111111
                             0000000000000
                             1111111111111                      0000000000000
                                                                1111111111111
                                                                0000000000000
                                                                1111111111111
                             0000000000000
                             11111111111112 1                   0000000000000
                                                                1111111111111
                                                                     1 0
                             0000000000000
                             1111111111111
                             0000000000000
                             1111111111111                      0000000000000
                                                                1111111111111
                                                                0000000000000
                                                                1111111111111  00000
                                                                               11111
                             000000
                             111111
                             0000000000000
                             1111111111111
                             000000
                             111111                             0000000000000
                                                                1111111111111  00000
                                                                               11111
                             0000000000000
                             1111111111111
                             000000
                             111111                             0000000000000
                                                                1111111111111  00000
                                                                               11111
                             0000000000000
                             1111111111111
                             000000
                             111111                             0000000000000
                                                                1111111111111  00000
                                                                               11111
                                                                               00000
                                                                               11111
                 2           0000000000000
                             1111111111111
                             000000
                             111111
                             0000000000000
                             1111111111111
                                  2 1                           0000000000000
                                                                1111111111111
                                                                0000000000000
                                                                1111111111111  00000
                                                                               11111
                                                                                 0
                             000000
                             111111
                             0000000000000
                             1111111111111
                             000000
                             111111
                                              0
                                                                0000000000000
                                                                1111111111111
                                                                   2         1 00000
                                                                               11111
                             0000000000000
                             1111111111111
                             000000
                             111111                             0000000000000
                                                                1111111111111  00000
                                                                               11111
                             0000000000000
                             1111111111111
                             000000
                             111111                             0000000000000
                                                                1111111111111  00000
                                                                               11111
                                                                               00000
                                                                               11111
                             0000000000000
                             1111111111111
                             000000
                             111111
                             0000000000000
                             1111111111111                      0000000000000
                                                                1111111111111
                                                                0000000000000
                                                                1111111111111  00000
                                                                               11111
                             000000
                             111111                                            00000
                                                                               11111

                                                                   0
                                111111111111
                                000000000000  1                 111111111111
                                                                000000000000
                                000000000000
                                111111111111
                                000000000000
                                111111111111
                                          0
                                                                000000000000
                                                                111111111111
                                                                000000000000
                                                                111111111111
                                                                      1
                                000000000000
                                111111111111                    000000000000
                                                                111111111111
                                000000000000
                                111111111111
                                     1
                                000000000000
                                111111111111                    000000000000
                                                                111111111111
                                                                          0
                                                                000000000000
                                                                111111111111
                                000000000000
                                111111111111
                                000000000000
                                111111111111                    000000000000
                                                                111111111111
                                                                000000000000
                                                                111111111111
                                000000000000
                                111111111111                    000000000000
                                                                111111111111
                                000000000000
                                111111111111
                                000000000000
                                111111111111                    000000000000
                                                                111111111111
                                                                000000000000
                                                                111111111111
                                000000000000
                                111111111111
                                        0                       000000000000
                                                                111111111111
                                                                        1
                                000000000000
                                111111111111
                                000000000000
                                111111111111                    000000000000
                                                                111111111111
                                                                000000000000
                                                                111111111111
                                000000000000
                                111111111111                    000000000000
                                                                111111111111
                                000000000000
                                111111111111                    000000000000
                                                                111111111111
                                000000000000
                                111111111111                    000000000000
                                                                111111111111
                                000000000000
                                111111111111
                                000000000000
                                111111111111
                                            1                   000000000000
                                                                111111111111
                                                                     0
                                                                000000000000
                                                                111111111111
                                000000000000
                                111111111111                    000000000000
                                                                111111111111
                                000000000000
                                111111111111    0               000000000000
                                                                111111111111
                                                                 1
                                000000000000
                                111111111111
                                000000000000
                                111111111111                    000000000000
                                                                111111111111
                                                                000000000000
                                                                111111111111
                                000000000000
                                111111111111                    000000000000
                                                                111111111111
                                000000000000
                                111111111111                    000000000000
                                                                111111111111
                                000000000000
                                111111111111                    000000000000
                                                                111111111111
                                000000000000
                                111111111111
                                000000000000
                                111111111111                    000000000000
                                                                111111111111
                                                                000000000000
                                                                111111111111
                                000000000000
                                111111111111                    000000000000
                                                                111111111111
                                000000000000
                                111111111111                    000000000000
                                                                111111111111

                                             Figure 19.

determine the configuration of pi−1 -facets given in Figure 19 which corresponds to the position of
µ in this set. (Thus the shaded regions here represent weights outside of the translate considered.)
Then the intersection of Wpi−1 .µ with these pi−1 -facets gives the (immediate) descendants of µ in
cf(λ, i − 1). All elements of cf(λ, i − 1) arise in this manner. In [5] it was proved that cf(λ, 1) is
precisely the set of composition factors of ∇(λ).
   As S a (V ) has no repeated composition factors, each weight µ that labels such a factor has a
unique collection of ancestors; i.e. a series µi = (a, 0), µi−1 . . . , µ1 = µ such that µj occurs as an
immediate decedent of µj+1 in cf(λ, j). (Note that not all of these weights are necessarily distinct.)
Each such µj comes from a configuration of facets given in Figure 19, and hence has an associated
integer aj (µ) from {0, 1, 2}. This is the series of integers which we assign to µ. We can now prove
the following refinement of [5, Proposition 5.4].
Proposition 8.1. Given a composition factor L(µ) of S a (V ), the associated carry pattern is the
m-tuple of integers whose jth entry equals aj (µ)

Proof: Argue as in the proof of [5, Proposition 5.4], noting that in the extra cases (where (a, 0)
lies on a wall), the pi -facets containing (a, 0) are all the same type until the first such pj -facet
which is a alcove, after which the remaining pi -facets (for i ≥ j) are also all of the same type. 
   As an example of this Proposition consider S 184 (V ) wit p = 5. The composition factors and
their associated carry patterns are illustrated in Figure 20, together with the first two iterations
of the composition factor algorithm and the complete submodule lattice.
   At the first iteration of the algorithm, the configuration of alcoves used is as shown in Iteration
1, and hence the final digit of each carry pattern is either 0 or 1 by Figure 19. Using Iteration
2 we can determine the penultimate digit of each factor; for example those arising from Iteration
2(c) will have final pair 21. For the final iteration we use the wall cases given in Figure 19 to give
the initial digit of each carry pattern.
30                                   ANTON COX AND ALISON PARKER




      ω2                                                                                              ω1
                                                                                               000
                                                                                   010
                                                                                                100
                                                                                     110




                                                                            120

                                                     011                       020

                                            001        111     121

           Iteration 1.                                              021
                                      101




                                                                                  Submodule lattice
                                                                                      121

                                                                                  120 111 021
             a    b c
                                                                                  020 110 011 101

                             e   d                                                010 100 001

                            f                                                            000

           Iteration 2.


                                                  Figure 20.

   Another, slightly more detailed, example of the mechanics of the composition factor algorithm
(in the alcove case, with λ = (181, 0), again with p = 5) is given in [5, Figure 2]. The corresponding
submodule lattice is given in [5, Figure 6]. (Note that there is an edge missing in the latter diagram
from the node 120 to the node 121.)
Remark 8.2. Note that the first digits of the carry patterns distinguish the terms in the p-filtration
of S a (V ) in which the corresponding composition factors lie. Similarly for a fixed choice of the first
i digits, the (i + 1)st digits distinguish the terms in the pi+1 -filtration of an appropriate ∇pi (µ).

     We are now in a position to prove
Theorem 8.3. Suppose that λ = (a, 0) or (0, b). All non-zero homomorphisms ∇(λ) → ∇(µ) are
either composites of Carter-Payne maps (as described in the preceding section) or induced from
non-zero homomorphisms ∇p (λ̃) → ∇p (µ).
   In particular, for λ of the form (a, 0) all non-twisted maps are of the form φ∗L or φ∗R φ∗L , and
twisted maps correspond (after translation and twisting) to homomorphisms from some ∇(c, 0)
where (c, 0) is any weight lying in the same facet as (λ̃)′′ . The case λ = (0, b) is similar.

Proof: As the contravariant duals of ∇(a, b)∗ and L(a, b)∗ are ∇(b, a) and L(b, a) respectively,
we may assume that λ = (a, 0). For there to be a non-zero homomorphism it is clearly necessary
that the quotient of ∇(λ) with simple socle L(µ) must only contain composition factors L(τ ) with
τ ≤ µ. (As ∇(λ) is a symmetric power, and hence is multiplicity free, this quotient is well defined.)
By the universal property of ∇(µ) this condition is also sufficient; we will determine precisely the
                       HOMOMORPHISMS BETWEEN WEYL MODULES FOR SL3 (k)                                  31


set of such µ (and show in doing so that the maps are of the form described in the statement of
the Theorem).
   Suppose that λ lies in the interior of an alcove. For µ to be a possible candidate for a homomor-
phism, the series of steps in the composition factor algorithm which leads to µ must be such that,
at every stage, the immediate descendants of µj+1 occurring above µj in the relevant configuration
from Figure 19 must be labelled by smaller integers in Figure 19. (Otherwise it is easy to verify
that there exists a weight τ ≥ µ whose carry pattern is above that of µ.) By considering the various
configurations given in Figure 19, we see that the only candidates for homomorphisms are those
weights for which maps are already known to exist by the results in the preceding section. That
completes the proof when λ lies in the interior of an alcove; the two wall cases are similar.     
   The reader may find it helpful to consider the example in Figure 20. In this case there are
homomorphisms into the induced modules labelled by 000 (identity), 011 (φ3L ), 121 (φ2R φ3L ), 111
(φ1R φ3L ), 010 (φ2L ), 110 (φ1R φ2L ), 100 (twist of identity map from 100′′ ), 110 (twist of φ1L from
100′′ ), and 120 (twist of twist of identity from (120′′ )′′ in 100′′ ). (Here we are abusing notation by
combining carry patterns with our conventions on weights with primes on.) Note that these are
precisely the vertices v in the submodule lattice such that all vertices above them in the lattice
label weights occurring below the weight labelled by v.
   The only class of facets which we have not yet considered are just dominant up alcoves. The
argument here is an easier form of Theorem 7.3. Although there is no longer a vertex below the
weight λ under consideration, we will use our knowledge of homomorphisms from a weight ν on the
horizontal wall below it instead (which was already required as condition (3) in the statement of
Theorem 7.3). By the translation arguments in the proof of Theorem 5.1 we know that a necessary
condition for the existence of a map from ∇(λ) to ∇(µ) is that there is a map from ∇(ν) to ∇(δ)
for some δ on one of the walls in the closure of the alcove containing µ.

Theorem 8.4. Suppose that ν lies on a just dominant horizontal wall, and we have a composite
of Carter-Payne maps from ∇(ν) to ∇(δ). Let λ lie in an up alcove with ν on the wall below λ
and τ the lower vertex in the closure of the down alcove below ν. If we have a weight µ ∈ W.λ with
µ in either of the alcoves adjacent to the wall containing δ then

                                        Hom(∇(λ), ∇(µ)) 6= 0.

When λ is a right-hand just dominant weight the set of such maps is precisely those maps in

                                        {φ∗R φ∗L , φ∗L , φ1B , φ1L φ1B }

which only involve reflections between dominant weights. The case of λ a left-hand just dominant
weight is similar.

Proof: We consider the right-hand just dominant case; the other is similar. By Theorem 8.3 the
map from ∇(ν) to ∇(δ) must be of the form φ∗L or φ∗R φ∗L , and hence the various configurations
that must be considered are as shown in Figure 21.
   By Lemma 7.1 and the local data in Section 3 we see that each of the composites given in the
statement of the Theorem is non-zero, and by considering Figure 21 we see that no further maps
are required.                                                                                
   In Theorem 7.5 we constructed a second class of maps for interior weights, coming from twisted
maps. Thus we also need to consider the corresponding case for λ in a just dominant up alcove.
The untwisted form of the top ∇p -factor in ∇(λ) will be a symmetric power. For any map from
such a symmetric power which is a composite of Carter-Payne maps, it is easy to verify using
Figure 21 and the classification of such maps in Theorem 8.3 that the twisted version is actually
one of the Carter-Payne maps of the original module considered in the Theorem above. Thus the
only remaining problems are the cases arising from twists of maps which are not Carter-Payne
composites. These are the subject of the following section.
32                                 ANTON COX AND ALISON PARKER


                                                       (a)


                                                 φL
                                     (b)

                                                      φR
                                                                 (c)




                                              Figure 21.



                   9. Determining homomorphisms III: exceptional maps

  Let us review the cases which have been covered so far. If λ is just dominant then all possible
homomorphisms have been constructed in Section 8.
   If λ is a vertex then ∇(λ) = ∇p (λ) and the result is clear from (1). For all remaining λ we have
used translation arguments to classify all homomorphisms induced from vertex homomorphisms
which are either composites of Carter-Payne maps or twisted maps for certain weights. (Note that
this includes all weights in the lowest p2 -alcove, where all translations are of the identity map.)
   There remains one extra class of possible maps, which we call exceptional maps. These maps are
those which are scaled versions of the exceptional p-good maps. That is, they are obtained either
by translating a twisted map from a vertex which is a smaller exceptional map, or by translating an
exceptional map from a vertex. In what follows we consider the case of exceptional maps coming
from weights near the right-hand edge of the dominant region — the left-hand case is entirely
symmetric. Since the exceptional p-good maps are generically not composites of Carter-Payne
maps neither are the scaled versions of these maps. So to construct those maps which cannot be
found by factoring through the G1 -head of ∇(λ) we must use some other method.
  We first define the notion of two weights λ and ξ being in exceptional configuration inductively.
A map from ∇(λ) to ∇(ξ) is then an exceptional map if the two weights λ and ξ are in exceptional
configuration.
   First, the weights labelled by 1 and 3 in Figures 2a(i) and 1 and 2 in 2c(i) are in an exceptional
configuration. (These are the weights that give the exceptional p-good maps.)
   We say that two Steinberg weights λ and ξ are in an exceptional configuration if they are in the
same G-block and they come from two smaller weights in exceptional configuration. That is we
have λ = pd λ1 + (pd − 1)ρ and ξ = pd ξ1 + (pd − 1)ρ and λ1 and ξ1 are in exceptional configuration
with d ∈ N and λ1 and ξ1 both non-Steinberg weights.
   We say that two non-Steinberg weights λ and ξ are in an exceptional configuration if the Stein-
berg weight σ1 directly below λ and σ2 with σ2 < σ1 are in exceptional configuration and ξ is an
eligible σ2 translate. This is illustrated for various cases in Figures 22, 23, 24 and 25 where the
weights λ and α and λ and β are in exceptional configuration. These figures represent the generic
situation and the weights are related by large pd -reflections. It is possible for σ1′′ to lie on a wall or
be a Steinberg weight. If σ1′′ is a Steinberg weight then it must lie in the interior of larger pd -alcove
and then σ1 and σ2 are related by pd -reflections for some d > 1. If σ1′′ is on a wall then it is possible
for the p-filtration pattern of ∇(λ) to go into the other pd -alcove.
    If there is no Steinberg weight below λ then we say λ and ξ are in an exceptional configuration
if there is a homomorphism from ∇(λ) to ∇(ξ) (these were determined in the previous section)
                      HOMOMORPHISMS BETWEEN WEYL MODULES FOR SL3 (k)                                   33


but this is not constructed by a composite of Carter-Payne maps. That is, it can only be obtained
by factoring through the G1 -head of ∇(λ).
   Thus the exceptional configurations are just scaled versions of the exceptional p-good maps and
hence always have the same basic configuration as in Figures 22, 23, 24 and 25 (and the dual
versions for the other edge of the dominant region).

                                                     η
  (a)   111111
        000000                       σ1          λ           (b)
        000000
        111111
        000000
        111111                                                     1111111
                                                                   0000000                 λ
        000000
        111111                                                     0000000
                                                                   1111111                       ν
        000000
        111111                   ζ1                  ν             0000000
                                                                   1111111
        000000
        111111                                                     0000000
                                                                   1111111
        000000
        111111                                                     0000000
                                                                   1111111   ζ                    σ1
        000000
        111111                                                     0000000
                                                                   1111111
                                                                   0000000 µ
                                                                   1111111
                                                                                       1

        000000
        111111                       µ     τ                                                τ
        000000
        111111                                                     0000000
                                                                   1111111
        000000
        111111                                                     0000000
                                                                   1111111
        000000
        111111 ζ                                                   0000000
                                                                   1111111
                                                                   0000000
                                                                   1111111
        000000
        111111                                                             ζ
        000000
        111111
                           2
                                                                   0000000
                                                                   1111111
                                                                         σ
                                                                                   2
             σ
        000000
        111111                   β                                 0000000
                                                                   1111111     β
                                                                   0000000
                                                                   1111111
                                                                               2
                       2
        000000
        111111                                                     0000000
                                                                   1111111
                                                                       α
        000000
        111111
           α
        000000
        111111                                                     0000000
                                                                   1111111
        000000
        111111                                                     0000000
                                                                   1111111
                                                                   0000000
                                                                   1111111

                                               Figure 22.


                                         111111
                                         000000σ                   1       λ
                                         000000
                                         111111
                                         000000
                                         111111
                                         000000
                                         111111
                                         000000
                                         111111
                                         000000
                                         111111
                                         000000
                                         111111
                                         000000
                                         111111                        τ
                                         000000
                                         111111
                                         000000
                                         111111
                                         000000
                                         111111
                                         000000
                                         111111
                                             σ
                                         000000
                                         111111          2

                                         000000
                                         111111
                                         000000
                                         111111
                                             α
                                         000000
                                         111111
                                         000000
                                         111111
                                         000000
                                         111111
                                               Figure 23.

  Before we construct these maps, we note
Corollary 9.1. Assumption 5.2 holds.

Proof: This follows from Theorems 7.2 and 7.5, and the possible configurations coming from
exceptional maps as considered above.                                                    
   Thus we have completed the proof of Theorem 5.1, and it only remains to construct the excep-
tional maps.
Theorem 9.2. If λ and ξ are in an exceptional configuration then there is a homomorphism from
∇(λ) to ∇(ξ).

Proof: If λ (and hence ξ) is p2 -restricted then the only possible exceptional configuration is exactly
that which gives the exceptional p-good homomorphisms. Thus the theorem is true in this case.
We have also proved this theorem (essentially by definition) if ∇(λ) is as in Section 8.
 34                                       ANTON COX AND ALISON PARKER


                                               ζ1
      (a)   1111111
            0000000                                           λ       (b)
                                                                            1111111µ ζ
                                                                            0000000
            0000000
            1111111
            0000000
            1111111
                                               µ
                                                                            0000000
                                                                            1111111
                                                                                                    1
                                                                                                                 λ
            0000000
            1111111                             σ1                          0000000
                                                                            1111111
            0000000
            1111111                                                         0000000 σ
                                                                            1111111
            0000000
            1111111                                                         0000000
                                                                            1111111
                                                                            0000000
                                                                            1111111
                                                                                                1
            0000000
            1111111
            0000000
            1111111                                                         0000000
                                                                            1111111
            0000000
            1111111                                      τ                  0000000
                                                                            1111111                      τ
            0000000
            1111111                                                         0000000
                                                                            1111111
            0000000
            1111111
                  σ
                                              ζ2                            0000000
                                                                            1111111
                                                                            0000000
                                                                            1111111
            0000000
            1111111                       β
                                                                            0000000
                                                                            1111111
            0000000
            1111111           2
                                                                                 σ
                                                                            0000000β ζ
                                                                            1111111
            0000000
            1111111                                                         0000000
                                                                            1111111
                                                                                        2
                                                                                                    2
            0000000
            1111111                                                         0000000
                                                                            1111111
            0000000
            1111111
                 α
            0000000
            1111111
                                                                                α
                                                                            0000000
                                                                            1111111
            0000000
            1111111                                                         0000000
                                                                            1111111
            0000000
            1111111                            γ                            0000000 γ
                                                                            1111111

                                                     Figure 24.

(a)                                                          (b)
                                                                                            λ
                        σ1            λ
                                                                              σ1


       σ2                                                        σ2
                                  τ                                                 τ
                                                             α
α




(c)                λ                          (d)                       λ          (e)                               λ
                                                             σ1
                                                                                                    σ1
                             σ1
                    τ                                                                                        τ
                                                                        τ
                                                                                   σ2
            σ2                                σ2     α
                                                                                   α
            α



                                                     Figure 25.


      We now take the statement of the theorem as our inductive hypothesis for the rest of this section.
    By left/right symmetry and the results from Section 8, it remains to consider the case where
 λ and ξ are in an exceptional configuration with σ1 below λ and we have a homomorphism from
 ∇(σ1 ) to ∇(σ2 ) with eligible σ2 -translates α and β as shown. (Note that for the remainder of
 this section we have adopted a non-standard labelling of the weights; in particular τ is the weight
 usually denoted λ̃.)
                       HOMOMORPHISMS BETWEEN WEYL MODULES FOR SL3 (k)                                    35


   By inspection we see that there are several possible type of cases that can occur, as illustrated
in the figures. The lower alcove and lefthand wall case have a similar weight configuration and the
upper alcove and horizontal wall case also has a similar configuration.
   In all the cases there is an obvious map from ∇(λ) to ∇(α). It is the one induced by the map
from ∇p (τ ) to ∇p (α). It remains to construct the map from ∇(λ) to ∇(β) as in Figures 22 and
24.

Lemma 9.3. Assume σ1 , σ2 , ζ1 and ζ2 are as in Figures 22 and 24. Then Hom(∇(σ1 ), ∇(σ2 )) 6= 0
implies that Hom(∇(ζ1 ), ∇(ζ2 )) 6= 0.

Proof: Clearly, by (1), this is equivalent to proving that Hom(∇(σ1′′ ), ∇(σ2′′ )) 6= 0 implies that
Hom(∇(ζ1′′ ), ∇(ζ2′′ )) 6= 0.
    Now ζ1′′ and σ1′′ are so close together that one must be in the closure of the facet containing
the other. Most of time they will be in the same facet. Firstly if ζ1′′ is in the closure of the facet
containing σ1′′ then the translation principle gives the desired result. So we may assume that σ1′′
is in the closure of the facet containing ζ1′′ . We now claim that if σ1′′ and σ2′′ are in an exceptional
configuration then so are ζ1′′ and ζ2′′ except for one case (where we will construct the map directly).
Then our inductive hypothesis gives the desired result.
   To see the claim we observe that if ζ1′′ is not in the same facet as σ1′′ then σ1′′ is either a Steinberg
weight and ζ1′′ is on a wall or σ1′′′ is on a wall and ζ1′′ is in an up alcove. We now look at Figures
22 and 24 and we see that ζ1′′ and ζ2′′ are in an exceptional configuration. The only thing that can
go wrong is if σ1 is on a left-hand wall (is α1 -singular) and this is the same wall used to get the
exceptional configuration. Although ζ1′′ and ζ2′′ are not then in an exceptional configuration, we
can construct the map from ∇(ζ1′′ ) to ∇(ζ2′′ ) directly: it is the map φdL φdR which is non-zero using
Lemma 7.1.                                                                                                
   Before returning to the proof of Theorem 9.2, we review the general theory that we will require.
Suppose we have some module category with non-trivial maps φ : A → B and ψ : C → D and
extensions

                                          0→A→E→C →0
                                          0 → B → F → D → 0.

We want the maps φ and ψ to glue together to give a map from E → F . This happens exactly
when the push out of E is the pull back of F . That is we need H := φE ∼
                                                                       = F ψ (using the notation
of MacLane[20, chapter 3]). Then the following diagram commutes

                                      0         // A         // E      // C       // 0
                                            φ           φ̄        Id 
                                                   
                                      0     // B         // H            // C     // 0
                                           Id         ψ̄         ψ
                                                                             
                                      0       // B         // F      // D         // 0

and the composite θ : E → H → F is non-zero. Moreover its image has the following short exact
sequence
                                     0 → im φ → im θ → im ψ → 0.                                       (10)

  We first consider the down alcove and left hand wall case (depicted in Figure 22) and start off
by assuming that µ and ν (in W.λ) in the figure are in different ∇p -classes.
   In this case we take A = ∇p (µ), B = ∇p (β), C = ∇p (τ ) and D = ∇p (α). We know that there
is an extension of A by C at the top of the p-filtration of ∇(λ) (by our assumption on µ and ν),
and of B by D at the bottom of the p-filtration for ∇(β). We denote these extensions by E and F
respectively. Thus it remains to show that φE ∼= F ψ.
36                                      ANTON COX AND ALISON PARKER


     First consider the diagram defining the pushout E ′ of E along φ:
                                    0     // ∇p (µ)     // E     // ∇p (τ )   // 0
                                            φ          φ̄           Id 
                                                         
                                    0     // ∇p (β)    // E ′    // ∇p (τ )   // 0.

This is exactly the definition of the connecting homomorphism ∂ in the long exact sequence ob-
tained by applying Hom(−, ∇p (β)) to the defining short exact sequence for E:
                                                                                      ∂
     0 → Hom(∇p (τ ), ∇p (β)) → Hom(E, ∇p (β)) → Hom(∇p (µ), ∇p (β)) → Ext1 (∇p (τ ), ∇p (β)).
As ∇p (τ ) and ∇p (β) are in different ∇p -classes, the first Hom-space is zero. Further, E sits at
the top of a filtration of ∇(λ), and hence has simple head in the ∇p -class of ∇p (τ ). Therefore the
second Hom-space is also zero, and ∂ is an embedding. By our inductive hypothesis and (1) we
have Hom(∇p (µ), ∇p (β)) ∼  = k.
   Consider Ext1 (∇p (τ ), ∇p (β)). By the results in [21, Lemma 4.2] and [22, Proposition 3.3.2]
(reproduced in [21, Proposition 4.1]) we have
                      Ext1 (∇p (τ ), ∇p (β)) ∼
                                             = Hom(∇(τ ′′ ), ∇(β ′′ ) ⊗ ∇(0, 1))
                                             ∼                σ′′                           (11)
                                             = Hom(∇(σ ′′ ), T ′′2 ∇(β ′′ )).
                                                                   1      β
                                                                                                    σ′′
This final Hom-space is one-dimensional (by our inductive hypothesis) either because Tβ ′′2 ∇(β ′′ ) ∼
                                                                                                     =
∇(σ2′′ ) (if β ′′ is not on a wall) or because
                              σ′′                         ′′
              Hom(∇(σ1′′ ), Tβ ′′2 ∇(β ′′ )) ∼
                                             = Hom(Tσ′′ ∇(σ1′′ ), ∇(β ′′ )) ∼
                                                    β
                                                                            = Hom(∇(ǫ), ∇(β ′′ ))
                                                         2

for some ǫ on the wall containing µ′′ .
   Thus any non-zero homomorphism from ∇p (µ) to ∇p (β) pushes out to the unique non-zero
extension
                             0 → ∇p (β) → E ′ → ∇p (τ ) → 0
as ∂ is an isomorphism.
     The case for the pullback is similar. We have the diagram
                                    0     // ∇p (β)    // F ′    // ∇p (τ )   // 0
                                             Id      ψ̄           ψ 
                                                            
                                    0     // ∇p (β)     // F     // ∇p (α)    // 0

and corresponding connecting homomorphism
                                                                                      ∂
     0 → Hom(∇p (τ ), ∇p (β)) → Hom(∇p (τ ), F ) → Hom(∇p (τ ), ∇p (α)) → Ext1 (∇p (τ ), ∇p (β)).

   By arguments as above the first pair of Hom-spaces are both zero, and ∂ becomes an isomorphism
from k to k. Thus any non-zero homomorphism from ∇p (τ ) to ∇p (α) pulls back to the unique
non-zero extension F ′ ∼
                       = E ′ and the composite map ψ̄ ◦ φ̄ from E to F is non-zero by (10). This
gives the required homomorphism
                                                       ψ̄◦φ̄
                                          ∇(λ) ։ E → F ֒→ ∇(β).

   When µ and ν are in the same ∇p -class we have to modify the above argument, as the extension
E above does not sit at the top of the p-filtration of ∇(λ). This problem can be rectified by taking
A to be the extension of ∇p (µ) by ∇p (ν) occurring in the p-filtration for ∇(λ), and E to be the
extension of A by ∇p (τ ) occurring at the top of this p-filtration. Note that A has been described
in Lemma 6.2; using this we deduce that there exists a weight η on the same wall as σ1′′ such that
                               Hom(A, ∇p (β))         ∼        ′′
                                                      = Hom(Tηµ ∇(η), ∇(β ′′ ))
                                                      ∼ Hom(∇(η), T η′′ ∇(β ′′ ))
                                                      =            µ
                                                      ∼
                                                      = Hom(∇(η), ∇(ρ))
                        HOMOMORPHISMS BETWEEN WEYL MODULES FOR SL3 (k)                                              37


where ρ is a weight on the same wall as σ2′′ . By the translation principle this latter Hom-space in
one-dimensional. The argument now goes through as before, with the new choices for A and E.
   The argument for Figures 23 and 24 is the same in the generic case where α and γ are in different
∇p classes. When α and γ are in the same ∇p -class then we need to construct a map from the
extension ∇p (µ) by ∇p (τ ) to the submodule of ∇(β) which has uniserial p-filtration by ∇p (β),
∇p (γ) and ∇p (α). This can be constructed in the similar way as for the down alcove case, using
Lemma 6.2 as before.
   As every exceptional configuration is of one of the forms depicted in Figures 22, 23, 24 or 25
(or their left-handed analogues) we have constructed all remaining maps, which completes our
induction for this section and our classification of homomorphisms.



                                                10. Examples

   In this section we give some examples for p = 3 of how we may apply the various theorems in
the paper to give all the possible homomorphisms starting at a particular induced module.
   In the diagrams an alcove is shaded if it contains a weight that is a composition factor of the
initial induced module, ∇(λ). This shading is dark if there is a homomorphism from ∇(λ) to
the induced module corresponding to the weight in the alcove. That is Hom(∇(λ), ∇(µ)) ∼        = k
where µ is in the Wp -orbit of λ and inside the shaded alcove. The lightly shaded alcoves are those
which contain weights µ ∈ W.λ which label composition factors but for which there is no non-zero
homomorphism from ∇(λ) → ∇(µ).
   In Figure 26 we determine all non-zero maps from ∇(10, 1), ∇(33, 6) and ∇(102, 21). We start
with ∇(10, 1). The weight (10, 1) is in the interior of a just dominant up alcove, and (10, 0) lies on
the horizontal wall just below it. Thus we will apply Theorem 8.4 with this pair of weights playing
the role of λ and ν respectively. Using Theorem 8.3, we only get two non-zero homomorphisms
starting from ∇(10, 0): the identity map and the map ∇(10, 0) → ∇(6, 1). We then apply Theorem
8.4 to obtain the four darkly shaded alcoves shown. (Alternatively it is not hard to see that the
only homomorphisms we get in this case are the p-good maps.) Thus we have (after transforming
the alcoves back into weights)

                                   Θ(10,1) = {(10, 1), (9, 0), (6, 3), (7, 1)}.

We can now determine the result for ∇(33, 6). The vertex immediately below (33, 6) is 3(10, 1) +
(2, 2). So we follow the procedure in Section 7 and use Theorem 7.2 to obtain the dark shaded
alcoves as shown. That is we take the set pΘ(10,1) + (p − 1, p − 1) and then shade in the alcoves
according to Figure 10. We get

  Θ(33,6) = {(33, 6), (34, 4), (33, 3), (31, 7), (30, 6), (31, 4), (28, 1), (19, 13), (18, 12), (19, 10),
                                                                                      (21, 9), (22, 4), (24, 4)}.

   We then can determine the result for ∇(102, 21) using Theorem 7.2 and Theorem 7.5. Rather
than give the complete list of weights here, we depict them graphically in Figure 26. In these cases
the only types of maps we get are composites of Carter–Payne maps and twisted maps.
   To illustrate a case involving walls we include Figure 27, where we determine all maps from
∇(11, 0), ∇(37, 4) and ∇(119, 16). The reader may verify that the procedure in the preceding
sections gives rise to the set of maps shown. The case of ∇(37, 4) is an example where the vertex
is not p2 -regular. These examples give all the different types of maps. Note that the excep-
tional p-good map ∇(11, 0) → ∇(6, 1) gives rise to the exceptional configurations ((37, 4), (18, 3))
and ((37, 4), (22, 1)) which in turn give rise to the exceptional configurations ((119, 16), (54, 9)),
((119, 16), (66, 3)) and ((119, 16), (70, 1)).
38                                  ANTON COX AND ALISON PARKER




                                                        00
                                                        11
                                                        00
                                                        11
                                                        00
                                                        11
                                                      11
                                                      0000
                                                        11
                                                         1
                                                         0                       ω1
                                                       00
                                                       11
                                                      00
                                                      11
                                                       0
                                                       100
                                                        1111
                                                          0 1
                                                            0
                                                            0
                                                     000
                                                       1
                                                     11000
                                                        11
                                                        111
                                                        0
                                                        1  1
                                                           0
                                                          001
                                                            0
                                                            0
                                                            11
                                                             0
                                                     000
                                                     11 1 11
                                                          000
                                                            10
                                                             1
                                                       1 0
                                                       0
                                                      00
                                                      11    0
                                                            1
                                                            1
                                                        00
                                                        11
                                                       00
                                                       11
                                                       00
                                                       11
                     00
                     11                              00
                                                     1100
                                                       11
                                                       00
                                                       11
                                                        00
                                                        111
                                                          0
                                                          1
                                                          01
                                                           0
                                                           00
                                                           11
                                                            00
                                                            11
                     00
                     11
                     11
                     00                              00
                                                     11
                                                     00
                                                     1100
                                                       11
                                                        00
                                                        110
                                                          100
                                                           11
                                                            00
                                                            11
                     11
                     00
                     00
                     1111
                       00
                      00
                      111
                        0                                 0
                                                          1
                00
                11 111
                   11
                   00
                   0
                  11
                  00 00
                      00
                      11
                       0
                       10
                        1 00
                          11
                00
                110
                  10
                   1
                  00
                  11
                   0
                   1
                   00
                   111
                     0
                     00
                     11
                      0
                      1
                     00
                     110
                       101
                        1 00
                          111
                            0
                 1
                 0
                 1
                 000
                  11
                  0
                  10
                   1
                   00
                   11 0
                      1
                     00
                     111
                       0  0
                          1
                         00
                         11         00
                                    11
                                    0
                                    1
                                   00
                                   11                                  ∆
                                                                           (102,21)
               11
               00
                11
                00
                 0
                 1   11
                     00
                      1
                      011
                       00
                       11
                       00 10
                          0
                         00
                         111      0
                                  1 00
                                    1
                                   00
                                   11 11
                                       0
                 0
                 100
                  11   1
                       0 11
                         00
                         1
                         0      000
                                  1111
                                1100
                                      0
                                      0
                                      1
                  00
                  11
                   00
                   11
                   00
                   11
                   0
                   1      1
                          0  00
                             11 1
                                0
                                0
                                10
                                 1  00
                                    11
               00
               1111
                 00
                 00
                 110
                   11 11
                    0
                   00
                   11
                   00
                   11 00    00
                            11
                             00
                             11
                             00
                             11
                             0
                             1  0
                                101
                                 1 00
                                    1
               11
               00
               00
               1100
                 1100
                   11
                    0
                    111
                     00
                      00 11
                      11   00
                            0
                            100
                             11
                             0
                             100
                              1100
                                11
                                 0
                                 1 0
                                   10
                                    1
                    0
                    1      00
                           1100
                             11
                            00
                            11
                            0
                            11
                             0
                            00
                            11   0
                                 1
                                00
                                111
                                  0
                                 00
                                 11
                            00 00
                            11
                           11
                           00
                           00
                           11   1101
                  00
                  11       00 1
                           11  000
                                11
                  00
                  11
                 00
                 11  0
                     1        0
                              101
                               1 0
                 11
                 00
                  11
                  00
                 00
                 1111
                   000
                     1       00
                             11
                              0
                              110
                               010
                                 1
                   10
                   0
                  00
                  11 1       00
                             1101
                  00
                  11         00
                             11
                                     00
                                     11                               = alcoves containing weights µ
                                                                        for which there is a map from
                                                                                     (µ)
                                                                         ∆
                                                                           (λ)
                                                                                      ∆

                                                              1
                                                              0
      ω2                                                      0
                                                              1        = alcoves containing weights
                                                                         which are composition factors of
                                                     (33,6)
                                                 ∆                         ∆
                                                                            (λ)



                                        (10,1)
                                    ∆



                                                 Figure 26.


                         11. Homomorphisms for the symmetric group

   In this section we will show how the results for SL3 can be used to classify homomorphisms
between certain Specht modules for the symmetric group.
   Let Σd be the symmetric group on d letters. For each partition λ of d we can explicitly define
a Specht module S λ for kΣd . (See for example [15, Chapter 3].)
   Partitions with at most n parts can also be used to label representations of GLn . The repre-
sentation theory of this group is essentially the same as that for SLn ; in particular given n part
partitions λ and µ of d we have that

                             HomGLn (∇(λ), ∇(µ)) ∼
                                                 = HomSLn (∇(λ̄), ∇(µ̄))

where for a partition τ = (τ1 , τ2 , . . . , τn ) we set τ̄ = (τ1 − τ2 , τ2 − τ3 , . . . , τn−1 − τn ). Those
representations of GLn labelled by partitions of d are also representations of the corresponding
Schur algebra S(n, d), and again the Hom-spaces are unchanged.
  The representation theory of the general linear group and the symmetric group are related. In
particular we have the following theorem of Carter and Lusztig
                      HOMOMORPHISMS BETWEEN WEYL MODULES FOR SL3 (k)                                   39

                                                                    0
                                                                    1
                                                                  0
                                                                  1
                                                                 11
                                                                 00
                                                                  0
                                                                  1 0
                                                                    1
                                                                    0
                                                                    10
                                                                     11
                                                                      0
                                                                 00
                                                                 11  0
                                                                     1
                                                                   2 0                      ω1
                                                           0
                                                           10
                                                            1 0
                                                              1    1
                                                                   00
                                                                    11
                                                                     2
                                                                           0
                                                                           1
                                                         0
                                                         1
                                                        00
                                                        11 0
                                                           10
                                                            1 0 1
                                                              1     0 0   10
                                                                           1
                                                         0
                                                         1
                                                        00
                                                        11
                                                         00
                                                         110
                                                           11
                                                            0
                                                            00
                                                            11
                                                          2 11
                                                              0
                                                              1           0
                                                                          1
                                                                          0
                                                                          1
                                                        00
                                                        11
                                                         00
                                                         110
                                                           100   00
                                                                 11
                                                                 00
                                                                 11
                                                                 0
                                                                 1 1
                                                                   0 0
                                                                     1    0
                                                                          1
                                                                 03 11
                                                                    00
                                                            2
                                                           0 00
                                                           1     00
                                                                 11
                                                                 1
                                                                11   0
                                                                     1
                                                                    00
                                                                    110
                                                                      1
                                                     00
                                                     11           1 1
                                                                  0   03
                                                        00
                                                        11
                                                       00
                                                       1100
                                                         11
                                                         0
                                                         1  0
                                                            1    1 0
                                                                 0      1
                                                       00
                                                       110
                                                         1
                                                         00
                                                         11 00
                                                            11
                                                            0
                                                            1
                                                       00 0
                                                       11    1 1
                                                                1 0
                                                              3

                  00
                  11 0
                     1                                00
                                                      11 0          0
                                                                    1
                  00
                  11
                 11
                 0000
                   11
                  00
                  11 0
                     11
                      0
                 00
                 11
                  11
                  00
                   00
                   11
                  00
                  11  1
                      0
                  11
                  00 2 0
                   2 0
                     1  100
                         11
                          0
                          1
                    1 11
                    0    00
                          0
                          1
                          0
                          1                                          1
                                                                     0
               11
               00         0
                          1
                          0
                          1
                          3                                          0
                                                                     1
      00
      11          11
                  00
                   11
                   00     0
                          1                                                      ∆
                                                                                     (119,16)
      00
      11
      0
      10
       1   0
           1       11
                   00
                   11
                   00
                   1
                   0
                   1
                   0    1
                        0
      0
      1
      11
      00
     00
     110
       1
      11
      00   0
           1     11
                 0011
                   00 3
     000
     112 1 1
         2
               0  1 0
                  0     1 00
                          11                        00
                                                    11
                                                     0
                                                     1
      11 11
      00      1
              0
             000
               1                                    1
                                                    00
                                                     1 1
                                                       0
      00
      11     00
             11                                 00
                                                11   1
                                                     0
                                                     2
      00
      11
       11
       00
       00
       11    11
             00                                 00
                                                11
                                                00
                                                110
                                                  1 1
                                                    0
    ω2 11
       001
         0  1
            0                                    00
                                                 11
                                                  0
                                                  1
                                                 00
                                                 11
       11
       0000
         113          1
                      0                           1
                                                  0
                                                  2
         00
         11                                      00
                                                 11
                                                            11
                                                            00
                                                            00
                                                            11           = alcoves (wall) containing
                                                                           weights µ for which there
                                                                           is a map from
                                                                                       (µ)
                                                                           ∆
                                                                              (λ)
                                                                                     ∆

                                                            (37,4)
                                                        ∆

                                                               1
                                                               0
                                                               0
                                                               1     = alcoves containing weights
                                                                       which are composition factors
                                                                            ∆
                                            (11,0)                           (λ)
                                        ∆
                                                                       of
                                                                       (with multiplicities)


                                            Figure 27.

Theorem 11.1 ([3, Theorem 3.7]). If p ≥ 3 and λ and µ are partitions of d with at most n parts
then
                        HomGLn (∇(λ), ∇(µ)) ∼ = HomkΣd (S λ , S µ ).

  We thus have
                           HomkΣd (S λ , S µ ) ∼
                                               = HomSLn (∇(λ̄), ∇(µ̄)).
Combining this with our earlier results gives
Corollary 11.2. Suppose that p ≥ 3, d > 0 and λ and µ are three part partitions of d. Then
HomkΣd (S λ , S µ ) can be determined from the results in the preceding sections.

                   12. Levi factors and a theorem of Fayers and Lyle

   In this final section we will show how our SL3 results can be applied to determine certain Hom-
spaces in higher rank cases, and show how the result of Carter and Lusztig relates work of Donkin
to a tensor product theorem for Hom-spaces due to Fayers and Lyle [13]. In each case, our main
tool will be a theorem of Donkin concerning certain Hom-spaces for Levi factors of a reductive
group G, which we begin by recalling.
  Let G be a reductive algebraic group as in Section 2. Given a subset I of the simple roots S,
we may also consider representations of the corresponding Levi factor GI of G. To distinguish
40                                      ANTON COX AND ALISON PARKER


such modules from those for the original group we shall use the subscript I. We have the following
result of Donkin (see [11, (4.3) Corollary]).

Theorem 12.1. If λ and µ ∈ X + are such that λ − µ ∈ ZI then
                                ExtiG (∇(λ), ∇(µ)) ∼
                                                   = ExtiGI (∇I (λ), ∇I (µ))
for all i ≥ 0.

   Now let G be GLn with the usual choice of simple roots as in [17, II, 1.21]. Suppose that λ and
µ are two partitions of d with at most n parts (which we regard as elements of X + ) and that we
can write λ = (λ(1), . . . , λ(t)) and µ = (µ(1), . . . , µ(t)), where for each i the elements λ(i) and µ(i)
are both partitions of di into at most ni parts. Then it is easy to verify that λ − µ is an element
of ZI, where I is the subset of S giving rise to the Levi factor GI ∼       = GLn1 × · · · × GLnt .
                                               ∼
   As noted in [8, (4)] we have that ∇I (λ) = ∇1 (λ(1)) ⊠ · · · ⊠ ∇t (λ(t)) (and similarly for ∇I (µ)),
where ∇i (λ(i)) is the induced module of weight λ(i) for GLni . Combining this with Theorem 12.1
and the Künneth formula we obtain
Corollary 12.2. Let m ∈ N, λ = (λ(1), . . . , λ(t)) and µ = (µ(1), . . . , µ(t)) be as above. Then we
have

     Extm
        GI (∇(λ), ∇(µ))
                          M
                  ∼
                  =                  ExtiGL
                                         1
                                              (∇1 (λ(1)), ∇1 (µ(1))) ⊗ · · · ⊗ ExtiGL
                                                                                   t
                                                                                        (∇t (λ(t)), ∇t (µ(t))).
                                            n1                                        nt
                      m=i1 +···+it

Corollary 12.3. If λ and µ ∈ X + differ only by an element of ZI, I a subset of the simple
roots and I can be realised as a root system whose largest connected component is of type A2 , then
the results of the preceding sections (together with the known result for type A1 ) can be applied to
determine HomG (∇(λ), ∇(µ)). In particular, the Hom-space is at most one-dimensional.

     Combining Theorem 11.1 and Corollary 12.2 we obtain
Corollary 12.4. Let λ and µ be as above and p ≥ 3. We have

             HomkΣd (S λ , S µ ) ∼
                                 = Hom kΣd1 (S λ(1) , S µ(1) ) ⊗ · · · ⊗ Hom kΣdt (S λ(t) , S µ(t) ).

   This is the theorem of Fayers and Lyle [13, Theorem 2.2]. We also note here that Donkin [7,
Section 10, Proposition 4] uses Schur functors to prove a generalised version of the above result
for Ext-groups (in small degree) for p ≥ 3.

Example 12.5. Let p = 5, G = GL7 (k), λ = (90, 63, 40, 8, 4, 4, 4) and µ = (90, 54, 39, 18, 4, 4, 4).
We denote the simple roots for G by αi = ǫi − ǫi+1 , where {ǫi } is the usual basis for X. We have
λ − µ = (0, 9, 1, −10, 0, 0, 0) = 9α2 + 11α3 . Thus
                      HomG (∇(λ), ∇(µ)) ∼
                                        = HomGL3 (k) (∇(63, 40, 8), ∇(54, 39, 18))
                                        = HomSL (k) (∇(23, 32), ∇(15, 21)) ∼
                                        ∼                                   = k.
                                                         3


We also get HomkΣ213 (S λ , S µ ) ∼
                                  =k



                                             Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Øyvind Solberg for some helpful suggestions used in Section 9.
We would also like to thank the organisers of the LMS Durham Symposium: Representations of
Finite Groups and Related Algebras, and of the Conference on Representation theory for Algebraic
Groups at Aarhus University, where part of this work was carried out.
                        HOMOMORPHISMS BETWEEN WEYL MODULES FOR SL3 (k)                                       41


                                                References
 [1] H. H. Andersen, On the structure of Weyl modules, Math. Z. 170 (1980), 1–14.
 [2]         , p-filtrations and the Steinberg module, J. Algebra 244 (2001), 664–683.
 [3] R. W. Carter and G. Lusztig, On the modular representations of the general linear and symmetric groups,
     Math. Z. 136 (1974), 193–242.
 [4] R. W. Carter and M. T. J. Payne, On homomorphisms between Weyl modules and Specht modules, Math. Proc.
     Camb. Phil. Soc. 87 (1980), 419–425.
 [5] A. G. Cox, Decomposition numbers for distant Weyl modules, J. Algebra 243 (2001), 448–472.
 [6] A. G. Cox and K. Erdmann, On Ext2 between Weyl modules for quantum GLn , Math. Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc.
     128 (2000), 441–463.
 [7] S. Donkin, Tilting modules for algebraic groups and finite dimensional algebras, Handbook of Tilting Theory
     (H. Krause and D. Happel, eds.), Cambridge University Press.
 [8]         , A note on decomposition numbers of general linear groups and symmetric groups, Math. Proc. Camb.
     Phil. Soc 97 (1985), 473–488.
 [9]         , On tilting modules for algebraic groups, Math. Z. 212 (1993), 39–60.
[10] S. Doty, Submodules of symmetric powers of the natural module for GLn , Contemp. Math. 88 (1989), 185–191.
[11] K. Erdmann, Ext1 for Weyl modules of SL2 (K), Math. Z. 218 (1995), 447–459.
[12] K. Erdmann and A. Henke, On Schur algebras, Ringel duality and symmetric groups, J. Pure Appl. Algebra
     169 (2002), 175–199.
[13] M. Fayers and S. Lyle, Row and column removal theorems for homomorphisms between Specht modules, J.
     Pure Appl. Algebra 185 (2003), 147–164.
[14] J. W. Franklin, Homomorphisms between Verma modules and Weyl modules in characteristic p, Ph.D. thesis,
     Warwick, 1981.
[15] G. D. James and A. Kerber, The representation theory of the Symmetric group, Encyclopedia of Mathematics
     and its Applications, vol. 16, Addison-Wesley, 1981.
[16] J. C. Jantzen, Darstellungen halbeinfacher Gruppen und ihrer Frobenius-Kerne, J. reine angew. Math. 317
     (1980), 157–199.
[17]         , Representations of algebraic groups, Academic Press, 1987.
[18] M. Koppinen, Homomorphisms between neighbouring Weyl modules, J. Algebra 103 (1986), 302–319.
[19] K. Kühne-Hausmann, Zur Untermodulstruktur der Weylmoduln für SL3 , Bonner Math. Schriften 162 (1985).
[20] S. MacLane, Homology, Springer, 1963.
[21] A. E. Parker, The global dimension of Schur algebras for GL2 and GL3 , J. Algebra 241 (2001), 340–378.
[22] S. el B. Yehia, On a question of Verma about the indecomposable representations of algebraic groups and of
     their Lie algebras, Ph.D. thesis, London, 1992.

   Centre for Mathematical Science, City University, Northampton Square, London, EC1V 0HB, Eng-
land.
   E-mail address: A.G.Cox@city.ac.uk

   School of Mathematics and Statistics F07, University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia.
   E-mail address: alisonp@maths.usyd.edu.au
