                                                                                                                                         1

                                               INVARIANT OPERATORS ON SUPERMANIFOLDS AND
arXiv:math/0202193v2 [math.RT] 3 Mar 2002




                                                            STANDARD MODELS


                                                                PAVEL GROZMAN, DIMITRY LEITES
                                                  Department of Mathematics, University of Stockholm, Kräftriket hus 6,
                                                         SE-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden; mleites@matematik.su.se

                                                                     IRINA SHCHEPOCHKINA
                                                 The Independent University of Moscow, Bolshoj Vlasievsky per, dom 11,
                                                       Moscow RU-121 002, Russia; Ira@Paramonova.mccme.ru

                                                Here we continue to list the differential operators invariant with respect to the
                                                15 exceptional simple Lie superalgebras g of polynomial vector fields. A part of
                                                the list (for operators acting on tensors with finite dimensional fibers) was earlier
                                                obtained in 2 of the 15 cases by Kochetkov and in one more instance by Kac and
                                                Rudakov. Broadhurst and Kac conjectured that some of these structures pertain
                                                to the Standard Models of elementary particles and the Grand Unified Theories.
                                                So, GUT, if any exists, will be formulated in terms of operators we found, or
                                                their r-nary analogs to be found. Calculations are performed with the aid of
                                                Grozman’s Mathematica-based SuperLie package. When degeneracy conditions
                                                are violated (absence of singular vectors) the corresponding module of tensor fields
                                                is irreducible. We also verified some of the earlier findings.




                                            Contents
                                                     To the memory of Misha Marinov (by D.L.) . . . . . . . . . . .                      2

                                            1 Introduction                                                                               4
                                              1.1 Veblen’s problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .              .      5
                                              1.2 Rudakov’s breakthrough (following Bernstein5 ) . . . . . . . .                  .      6
                                              1.3 Further ramifications of Veblen’s problem . . . . . . . . . . .                 .      8
                                              1.4 Arity > 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .             .      9
                                              1.5 Generalized tensors and primitive forms . . . . . . . . . . . .                 .     10
                                              1.6 Superization leads to new developments . . . . . . . . . . . .                  .     12
                                              1.7 An infinitesimal version of Veblen’s problem . . . . . . . . . .                .     14
                                              1.8 Operators invariant with respect to nonstandard realizations                    .     17
                                              1.9 On description of irreducible L-modules . . . . . . . . . . . .                 .     17

                                            2 Brief description of the exceptional algebras                                             18

                                            3 Singular vectors for g = vle(3|6)                                                         22
2   P. Grozman, D. Leites and I. Shchepochkina

4 Singular vectors for g = vle(4|3)                                           23

5 Singular vectors for g = mb(4|5) (after Kochetkov)                          26

6 Singular vectors for g = mb(3|8)                                            28

7 Singular vectors for g = ksle(5|10)                                         30

8 Singular vectors for g = ksle(9|11)                                         33

9 Singular vectors for g = ksle(11|9)                                         35

10 Singular vectors for g = kas and g = k(1|n)                                38

11 Singular vectors for g = kas(1|6; 3ξ)                                      40

12 Singular vectors for g = kas(1|6; 3η)                                      41

13 Singular vectors for g = vas(4|4)                                          43

    Acknowledgments                                                           44

    References                                                                44


To the memory of Misha Marinov (by D.L.)
Only one of us knew Misha. It was at the flat of one of my teachers, Felix
Berezin, that we became acquainted. I was a student then and was bubbling
with enthusiasm on account of fantastic visions, applications of supersymmetry,
which at that time was not so clear to most. Misha shared the awe of the beauty
of the mathematics related with SUSY. Besides this, he was a charming person.
Moreover, he was writing a review on superstrings. So Misha fascinated me.
     His review41 illuminated my research for many years ahead (Ref. 16 is just
a part of the story). Later Misha, being a man of passion, bitterly criticized
the whole trend as useless waste of many talents of several generations. I did
not take his vitriolic words at face value. I knew that however strong language
he used, it was merely rhetoric. He similarly criticized me for not being able to
quantize the “odd mechanic” (and Ref. 38 is a part of our answer to Misha) nor
demonstrate the “usefulness” of what was rediscovered several years later by
Batalin and Vilkovisky under the name antibracket together with the manifest
demonstrations of its usefulness (cf. Refs. 31 and 10). When the antibracket
                                     Invariant operators and Standard Models   3

was rediscovered Misha came to me and said, “Do you remember that stuff
about the two types of mechanics, you told me some time ago? Recently
Batalin talked a lot about what looks precisely like it, and he is one of the
rare few who only speaks about what he knows. If I had not known him for a
long time I’d think he had become crazy. He plans to do almost all gauge field
theory by means of this new mechanic. So, let me get you acquainted, you two
talk similar . . . ”
     Later, before he applied for emigration and while waiting for permission
(more likely for a refusal, at that time) Misha frequented an informal seminar
I hosted at home being also ready to quit the regular ways. Some mathe-
maticians having applied for emigration became personae non grata at official
seminars; in my flat they could discuss new and old results with those who
dared. Misha was our physics teacher, he tried to convey to us (J. Bernstein,
A. Beilinson, me, and occasional “guests”, from students to S. Gindikin) some
ideas of modern physics.
     Misha visited me at Stockholm recently. I took him to look at the frescos
of Täby kyrkan, one of the most interesting churches in Stockholm. The most
famous of the frescos is currently called “The Knight playing chess with Death”.
The original title, if it ever existed, is forgotten; the modern title is hardly
correct: depicted are a chess-board (5×5, to simplify Death’s task even further,
I presume), Death, and the Knight, smiling his best (as his PR advisor, no
doubt, taught him) politely inclined towards the ruling party. The Knight
stands on the same side of the board as Death, so manifestly both are playing
together against us. Misha, who was restless during the day being anxious not
to miss his train, suddenly relaxed having seen this fresco. This was the last
fresco we saw and on the way back we discussed something neutral. He said he
enjoyed the frescoes. On our way back we got into a traffic jam and missed his
train by a few minutes. Naturally, I paid the penalty. Misha wrote to me later
insisting to repay or split the cost, so I answered that I did not change that
much after emigration, and he should know better. He retorted as in the good
old days when we all were younger saying, “I regret that Israel is so small, and
so penalties for missing the train are low. Anyway, I hope to see you one day
and promise to make you miss the train from Haifa to wherever.” He also gave
me a reprint of his superstring paper (somebody “borrowed” my copy of the
reprint he gave me in Moscow) and wrote in Russian: “To DL, as a memory of
our friendship that I hope not interrupt”. The inscription looked very strange
to me. Now I understand it: he already knew about his cancer.
     I think all who knew Misha love him. One can not use past tense with this
verb. And therefore it is infinitely sad not to be able, ever, to miss the train
in Misha’s company, this side of the Chess-Board we all try to describe before
4   P. Grozman, D. Leites and I. Shchepochkina

we meet the ultimate opponent.


1   Introduction
This is a part of an expanded transcript of two talks at the International
Workshops “Supersymmetry and Quantum Symmetry”: (1) at Dubna, July
22-26, 1997, we described the case of kas and k(1|6), sketched the case k(1|n)
and mentioned earlier results of Kochetkov on vle(4|3) and mb(4|5), (2) at
Karpacz, September 23, 2001, we considered mb(3|8) and ksle(5|10).
     Broadhurst and Kac observed17 that some of the exceptional Lie superal-
gebras (listed in Refs. 50, 7) might pertain to a GUT or the Standard Model,
their linear parts being isomorphic to sl(5) or sl(3) ⊕ sl(2) ⊕ gl(1). Kac demon-
strated18 that for the Standard Model with su(3) ⊕ su(2) ⊕ u(1) as the gauge
group a certain remarkable relation between vle(3|6) and some of the known
elementary particles does take place; it seems that for mb(3|8) there is even
better correspondence.
     The total lack of enthusiasm from the physicists’ community concerning
these correspondences is occasioned, perhaps, by the fact that no real form
of any of the simple Lie superalgebras of vector fields with polynomial coef-
ficients has a unitary Lie algebra as its linear part. Undeterred by this, Kac
and Rudakov calculated19 some vle(3|6)-invariant differential operators. They
calculated the operators for finite dimensional fibers only. This restriction
makes calculations a sight easier but strikes out many operators. The amount
of calculations for mb(3|8) is too high to be performed by hands.
     The problem we address — calculation of invariant differential operators
acting in tensor fields on manifolds and supermanifolds with various structures
— was a part of our Seminar on Supermanifold’s agenda since mid-70’s. Here
we use Grozman’s code SuperLie14 to verify and correct earlier results and
obtain new ones, especially when bare hands are inadequate. The usefulness
of SuperLie was already demonstrated when we calculated the left-hand side of
N -extended SUGRA equations for any N , cf. Ref. 15. We review the whole field
with its open problems and recall interesting Kirillov’s results and problems
buried in the VINITI collection22 which is not very accessible. Another nice
(and accessible) review we can recommend in addition to Ref. 22 is Ref. 29.
     What is done
     (1) We list (degeneracy conditions) all differential operators, or rather
the corresponding to them singular vectors, of degrees 1, and 2 and, in some
cases, of all possible degrees (which often are ≤ 2), invariant with respect
to several exceptional Lie superalgebras of vector fields. When degeneracy
conditions are violated (absence of singular vectors) the corresponding induced
                                       Invariant operators and Standard Models   5

and coinduced modules are irreducible. For some exceptions EVERY module
I(V ) has a singular vector. This is a totally new feature. For vle(3|6) (and
finite dimensional fibers) the answer coincides with Kac-Rudakov’s one.
     (2) We observe that the linear parts of two of the W-regradings of mb are
Lie superalgebras strictly greater than sl(3) ⊕ sl(2) ⊕ gl(1). They (or certain
real forms of them) are natural candidates for the algebras of The would be
Standard Models; modern “no-go” theorems do not preclude them.


1.1   Veblen’s problem
The topology of differentiable manifolds has always been related with various
geometric objects on them and, in particular, with operators invariant with
respect to the group of diffeomorphisms of the manifold, operators which act
in the spaces of sections of “natural bundles”,29 whose sections are tensor fields,
or connections, etc. For example, an important invariant of the manifold, its
cohomology, stems from the de Rham complex whose neighboring terms are
bridged by an invariant differential operator — the exterior differential.
     The role of invariance had been appreciated already in XIX century in
relation with physics; indeed, differential operators invariant with respect to
the group of diffeomorphisms preserving a geometric structure are essential
both in formulation of Maxwell’s laws of electricity and magnetism and in
Einstein–Hilbert’s formulation of relativity.
     Simultaneously, invariance became a topic of conscious interest for math-
ematicians: the representation theory flourished in works of F. Klein, followed
by Lie and É. Cartan, to name the most important contributors; it provided
with the language and technique adequate in the study of geometric structures.
Still, it was not until O. Veblen’s talk in 1928 at the Mathematical Congress
in Bologna56 that invariant operators (such as, say, Lie derivative, the exterior
differential, or integral) became the primary object of the study. In what fol-
lows we rule out the integral and other non-local operators; except in Kirillov’s
example, we only consider local operators.
     Schouten and Nijenhuis tackled Veblen’s problem: they reformulated it in
terms of modern differential geometry and found several new bilinear invariant
differential operators. Schouten conjectured that there is essentially one unary
invariant differential operator: the exterior differential of differential forms.
This conjecture had been proved in particular cases by a number of people, and
in full generality in 1977–78 by A. A. Kirillov and, independently, C. L. Terng
(see Refs. 22, 55).
     Thanks to the usual clarity and an enthusiastic way of Kirillov’s presenta-
tion he drew new attention to this problem, at least, in Russia. Under the light
6     P. Grozman, D. Leites and I. Shchepochkina

of this attention it became clear (to J. Bernstein) that in 1973 A. Rudakov43
also proved this conjecture by a simple algebraic method which reduces Ve-
blen’s problem for differential operators to a “computerizable” one.
     Thus, a tough analytic problem reduces to a problem formally understand-
able by any first year undergraduate: a series of systems of linear equations in
small dimensions plus induction. The only snag is the volume of calculations:
to list all unary operators in the key cases requires a half page; for binary
operators one needs about 50 pages and induction becomes rather nontrivial;
for r-nary operators with r > 2 only some cases seem to be feasible.
     Later Rudakov and, for the contact series, I. Kostrikin, classified unary
differential operators in tensor fields on manifolds invariant with respect to
each of the remaining three simple infinite dimensional Z-graded Lie algebras
L of vector fields. In passing, the definition of the tensor field was generalized
and primitive forms came to foreground.

1.2    Rudakov’s breakthrough (following Bernstein5 )
Hereafter the ground field K is C or R. Without going into details which will
be given later, observe that the spaces in which invariant operators act fall into
two major cases: spaces of tensor fields (transformations depend on the 1-jet
of diffeomorphism) and spaces depending on higher jets, called HJ-tensors for
short. We will only study tensors here, not HJ-tensors.
     1) Instead of considering Diff(U )-invariant operators, where U is a local
chart, let us consider vect(U )-invariant operators, where vect(U ) is the Lie alge-
bra of vector fields on U with polynomial coefficients, or its formal completion.
(A posteriori one proves that the global and the local problems are equivalent,
cf. Ref. 5). Accordingly, instead of tensor fields with smooth coefficients, we
consider their formal version: T (V ) = V ⊗ K[[x]], where x = (x1 , . . . , xn ) and
n = dim U .
     2) We assume here that V is an irreducible gl(n)-module with lowest weight.
Observe that while the requirement of lowest weight seems to be “obviously”
reasonable, that on irreducibility is not, unless we confine ourselves to finite
dimensional modules V . In super setting we are forced, in the absence of
complete reducibility, to consider indecomposable representations even for finite
dimensional modules. Irreducible modules is just the simplest first step.
     3) Instead of the coinduced module, T (V ), consider the dual induced mod-
                                          ∂
ule, I(V ∗ ) = K[∂] ⊗ V ∗ , where ∂i = ∂x   i
                                              . The reason: formulas for vect(U )-
                             ∗
action are simpler for I(V ) than for T (V ). (The results, contrariwise, are
more graphic in terms of tensor fields.)
     Observe that each induced module is a “highest weight one” with respect
                                       Invariant operators and Standard Models     7

to the whole g = vect(U ), i.e., the vector of the most highest weight with
respect to the linear vector fields from g0 = gl(n) is annihilated by g+ , the
subalgebra of g consisting of all operators of degree > 0 relative the standard
grading (deg xi = 1 for all i).
    In what follows the vectors annihilated by g+ will be called singular ones.
    4) To every r-nary operator D : T (V1 ) ⊗ · · · ⊗ T (Vr ) −→ T (V ) the dual
operator corresponds
     D∗ : I(W ) −→ I(W1 ) ⊗ · · · ⊗ I(Wr ),     where    W = V ∗ , Wi = Wi∗ ,

and, since (for details see Ref. 43) each induced module is a highest weight
one, to list all the D’s, is the same as to list all the g0 -highest singular vectors
D∗ ∈ I(W1 ) ⊗ · · · ⊗ I(Wr ). In what follows r is called the arity of D.
    5) In super setting, as well as for non-super but infinite dimensional one,
the above statement is not true: the submodule generated by a singular vector
does not have to be a maximal one; it could have another singular vector of
the same degree due to the lack of complete reducibility.
    For unary operators and Lie algebras this nuisance does not happen; this
was one of the (unreasonable) psychological motivations to stick to the finite
dimensional case even for Lie superalgebras,6 cf. Ref. 54.
    6) Rudakov’s paper43 contains two results:
        (A) description of vect(n)-invariant operators in tensor fields (only the
exterior differential exists) and (the main bulk of the paper)
        (B) proof of the fact that between the spaces of HJ-tensors there are
no unary invariant operators.
    Problems 1) Describe r-nary invariant operators in the spaces of HJ-
tensors for r > 1.
    2) Describe r-nary invariant operators in the superspaces of HJ-tensors.
    The dual operators Kirillov noticed22 that by means of the invariant
pairing (we consider fields on M with compact support and tensoring over the
space F of functions)
                                                                    Z
      B : T (V ) × (T (V ∗ ) ⊗F Vol(M )) −→ R, (t, t∗ ⊗ vol) 7→ (t, t∗ )vol

one can define the duals of the known invariant operators. For the fields with
formal coefficients we consider there is, of course, no pairing, but we consider a
would be pairing induced by smooth fields with compact support. So the formal
dual of T (V ) is not T (V ∗ ) because the pairing returns a function instead of a
volume form to be integrated to get a number, and not T (V )∗ because T (V )∗
is a highest weight module while we need a lowest weight one. Answer: the
formal dual of T (V ) is T (V ∗ ) ⊗F Vol(M ).
8     P. Grozman, D. Leites and I. Shchepochkina

     Possibility to dualize, steeply diminishes the number of cases to consider
in computations and helps to check the results. Indeed, with every invariant
operator D : T (V ) −→ T (W ) the dual operator D∗ : T (W ∗ ) ⊗F Vol(M ) −→
T (V ∗ ) ⊗F Vol(M ) is also invariant. For example, what is the dual of d : Ωk −→
Ωk+1 ? Clearly, it is the same d but in another incarnation: d : Ωn−k−1 −→
Ωn−k . Though, roughly speaking, we only have one operator, d, the form of
singular vectors corresponding to d differs with k and having found several
“new” singular vectors we must verify that the corresponding operators are
indeed distinct. This might be not easy.
     Observe that these arguments do not work when we allow infinite dimen-
sional fibers (dualization sends the highest module into a lowest weight one,
so it is unclear if a highest weight module with a singular vector always cor-
respond to this lowest weight one). Sometimes, being tired of calculations, or
when the computer gave up, we formulated the description of singular vectors
“up to dualization”; sometimes even the computer became “tired”. We will
mention such cases extra carefully; we intend to reconsider these cases on a
more powerful computer.

1.3    Further ramifications of Veblen’s problem
Rudakov’s arguments43 show that the fibers of HJ-tensors have to be of infi-
nite dimension; the same holds for Lie superalgebras, though arguments are
different. Traditionally, fibers of tensor bundles were only considered to be
of finite dimension, though even in his first paper on the subject Rudakov43
digressed from traditions.
     1o . In the study of invariant operators, one of the “reasons” for confin-
ing to tensors, moreover, the ones corresponding to finite dimensional fibers,
is provided by two of Rudakov’s results:43 (1) there are no invariant opera-
tors between HJ-tensors, (2) starting with any highest weight modules I(V ),
Rudakov unearthed singular vectors only for fundamental (hence, finite di-
mensional) representations. Though (1) only applies to unary operators, re-
searchers were somewhat discouraged to consider HJ-tensors even speaking
about binary operators.
     Consider invariant operators of arity > 1 between the spaces of HJ-tensors
(see Problem above). Is it true that in this case there are no invariant operators
either?
     2o . Kirillov proved that (having fixed the dimension of the manifold and
arity) the degree of invariant (with respect to vect(n)) differential operators is
bounded, even dim of the space of invariant operators is bounded.
     There seems to be no doubt that a similar statement holds on superman-
ifolds ... but Kochetkov’s examples reproduced below and our own ones show
                                             Invariant operators and Standard Models   9

that these expectations are false in some cases.
     Problem Figure out the conditions when the dimension of the space
of invariant operators is bounded. (We conjecture that this is true for all the
series of simple vectorial Lie superalgebras in the standard grading.)
     3o . On the line, all tensors are λ-densities and every r-linear differential
operator is of the form

                  L : (f1 dxλ1 , . . . , fr dxλr ) −→ PL (f1 , . . . , fr )dxλ .

Kirillov shows (with ease and elegance) that invariance of L is equivalent to
the system
          Xr                                 
                 ∂ j+1            ∂j             λPL (t) for j = 0
               ts j+1 + (j + 1)λs j PL (t) =                              (∗)
                 ∂t s             ∂t s
                                                    0     for j > 0
          s=1

Clearly, differential
                Pr operators correspond to polynomial solutions PL (t) and in
this case λ = s=1 λs − deg PL . Kirillov demonstrated that nonpolynomial
solutions do exist: for r = 2 and λ1 = λ2 = 0 the function
                                                  t1 − t2
                                      PL (t) =
                                                  t1 + t2
satisfies (∗) for λ = 0.
     Problem What invariant operator corresponds to this solution? De-
scribe all (any) of the nonpolynomial solutions of (∗) and the corresponding
operators.
     4o . To select a reasonable type of r-nary operators is a good problem.
Symmetric and skew-symmetric operators, as well as operators on λ-densities
are the first choices but even in such simple cases there are few results. These
results, though scanty, are rather interesting: quite unexpectedly, some of them
are related to calculation of the N. Shapovalov determinant for the Virasoro
algebra, cf. Ref. 9.
     5o . Since the real forms of simple vectorial Lie algebras are only trivial ones
(in the natural polynomial basis replace all complex coefficients with reals), the
results for R and C are identical. In super cases for nontrivial real forms some
new operators might appear; we will discuss this in the detailed version of the
text.

1.4   Arity > 1
Grozman added a new dimension to Rudakov’s solution of Veblen’s problem:
in 1978 he described all binary invariant differential operators.11,12 It turned
10 P. Grozman, D. Leites and I. Shchepochkina

out that there are plenty of them but not too many: modulo dualizations
and permutations of arguments there are eight series of first order operators
and several second and third order operators all of which are compositions of
first order operators with one exception: the 3rd order irreducible Grozman
operator on the line. There are no invariant bilinear operators of order > 3.
     Miraculously, the 1st order differential operators determine, bar a few ex-
ceptions, a Lie superalgebra structure on their domain. (Here Lie superalgebras
timidly indicated their usefulness in a seemingly nonsuper problem. Other ex-
amples, such as Quillen’s proof of the index theorem, and several remarkable
Witten’s super observations followed soon.)
     Limits of applicability of Rudakov’s method                Though fans of
Rudakov’s method,a let us point out that its application to simple finite di-
mensional subalgebras of the algebras of vector fields is extremely voluminous
computational job; therefore, it is ill applicable, say, to isometries of a Rie-
mannian manifold or the group preserving the Laplace operator.
     Fortunately, when Rudakov’s method fails, one can usually apply other
methods (Laplace-Casimir operators, N. Shapovalov determinant, etc.).

1.5   Generalized tensors and primitive forms
Rudakov considered also operators invariant with respect to the Lie algebra
of Hamiltonian vector fields on the symplectic manifold (M 2n , ω).44 Thanks
to nondegeneracy of ω we can identify Ωi with Ωn−i . So the operator d∗ :
Ωn−i−1 −→ Ωn−i , dual to the exterior differential d : Ωi −→ Ωi+1 looks like a
new operator, δ : Ωi+1 −→ Ωi , the co-differential. There are also (proportional
to each other) compositions δ◦ω◦δ and d◦ω −1 ◦d, where ω −1 is the convolution
with the bivector dual to ω.
      A novel feature is provided by the fact that “tensors” now are sections of
the representation of sp(V ), not gl(V ). Since various representations of sp(V )
can not be extended to representations of gl(V ) these “tensors” are, strictly
speaking, new notions.
      Another novel feature we encounter considering subalgebras g of vect are
primitive forms. If the vect-module I(V ) contains a singular vector with respect
to vect, so it does with respect to g. But the irreducible vect0 -module V does
not have to remain irreducible with respect to submodule of the g0 . The
g0 -irreducible component with the biggest highest weight in V is called the
g0 -primitive (usually, just primitive) component. Examples: the primitive
components appeared in symplectic geometry (we encounter their counterparts
a Interplay between restriction and induction functors goes back to Frobenius, but discovery
of each instance deserves an acknowledgement, we presume.
                                     Invariant operators and Standard Models    11

in finite dimensional purely odd picture as spherical harmonics,46,37 ) contact
analogues of primitive forms are described in Ref. 32. Spaces of primitive
differential and integrable forms are just restrictions of the “usual” domain of
the exterior differential; but other types of primitive tensors are domains of
really new invariant operators.
    Further examples A. Shapovalov and Shmelev considered the Lie su-
peralgebras of Hamiltonian vector fields and (following Bernstein2 who consid-
ered the non-super case) their central extension, the Poisson Lie superlagebra,
see Refs. 45, 46 and 52-54. Shmelev also considered the operators invariant
with respect to the funny exceptional deformation hλ (2|2) of the Lie superalge-
bra h(2|2) of Hamiltonian vector fields.51 See also Ref. 38 for further description
of hλ (2|2).
     By that time I. Kostrikin described singular vectors for the contact Lie
algebras and found a “new” 2nd order invariant operator. This operator was
actually well-known in differential geometry as an Euler operatorP(for its de-
scription see Ref. 39; here we just briefly observe that it is not    xi ∂i , this
is another Euler operator); it is needed for invariant formulation of Monge-
Ampére equations, cf. Ref. 40. Leites32 generalized I. Kostrikin’s calculations
to contact Lie superalgebras and found out that there seem to be no analogue of
Euler’s operator in supersetting. This makes one contemplate on the following:
    Problem What are superanalogs of Monge-Ampére equations, if any?
     In 1977 “odd” analogs of the hamiltonian and contact series were
discovered.31,1 Batalin and Vilkovisky rediscovered the antibracket related to
these series and showed its importance, cf. Ref. 10. Kochetkov24−28 undertook
the task of calculating the corresponding singular vectors. He digressed to con-
sider two of the three known at that time Shchepochkina’s exceptions23 (and
named after her with the first Cyrillic letter of her name), one of which was
recently reconsidered in another realization in Ref. 19. At the last moment we
have found out more singular vectors (= invariant operators) than in Ref. 23
, even with finite dimensional fibers; SuperLie is indeed indispensable. After
the last moment we have considered w2 ; we reproduce Kochetkov’s result for
comparison. For the lack of resources we left out some possible cases of sin-
gular vectors, but we are sure they are improbable. Though for vle(4|3) and
mb(4|5) all degrees can occure, we are sure induction à la Kochetkov (complete
list of singular vectors) can be performed. Various regradings of ksle seem to
be a tougher problem.
12 P. Grozman, D. Leites and I. Shchepochkina

1.6   Superization leads to new developments

The study of invariant differential operators on supermanifolds began in 1976 as
a byproduct of attempts to construct an integration theory on supermanifolds
similar to the integration theory of differential forms on manifolds. Bernstein
and Leites became interested in Veblen’s problem when they tried to construct
an integration theory for supermanifolds containing an analog of the Stokes
formula.3,4 At that time there were only known the differential forms which
are impossible to integrate and the volume forms of the highest degree. Unlike
the situation on manifolds, no volume form coincides with any differential form
and there was known no analogs of volume forms of lesser degrees.
     Having discovered integrable forms3,5 (i.e., the forms that can be inte-
grated; Deligne calls them integral forms8 ) Bernstein and Leites wanted to be
sure that there were no other tensor objects that can be integrated. Observe
several points of this delicate question.
     (1) The conventional Stokes formula on a manifold exists due to the fact
that there is an invariant operator on the space of differential forms. The
uniqueness of the integration theory with Stokes formula follows then from the
above result by Rudakov and its superization due to Bernstein and Leites.
     Since there are several superanalogs of the determinant, it follows that on
supermanifolds, there are, perhaps, several analogs of integration theory, see
Ref. 34, some of them without Stokes formula. Still, if we wish to construct
an integration theory for supermanifolds containing an analog of the Stokes
formula, and, moreover, coinciding with it when the supermanifold degenerates
to a manifold, we have to describe all differential operators in tensor fields on
supermanifolds.
     (2) Bernstein and Leites confined themselves to finite dimensional repre-
sentations ρ owing to tradition which says that a tensor field is a section of a
vector bundle with a finite dimensional fiber on which the general linear group
acts. Even in doing so Bernstein and Leites had to digress somewhat from the
conventions and consider, since it was natural, ALL finite dimensional irre-
ducible representations ρ of the general linear Lie superalgebra. Some of such
representations can not be integrated to a representation of the general linear
supergroup.
     Inspired by Duflo, Leites used calculations of Ref. 5 to describe invariant
differential operators acting in the superspaces of tensor fields with infinite
dimensional fibers, see Ref. 36. These operators of order > 1 are totally new,
though similar to fiberwise integration along the odd coordinates. The opera-
tors of order 1 are also not bad: though they are, actually, the good old exte-
rior differential d, the new domain is that of semi-infinite forms, certain class
                                      Invariant operators and Standard Models    13

of pseudodifferential forms. Observe that quite criminally (in V. I. Arnold’s
words) no example of the corresponding new type homology is calculated yet,
except some preliminary (but important) results of Shander, see Ref. 33 v. 31,
Ch. 4, 5.
     (3) Even under all the restrictions Bernstein and Leites imposed, to say
that “the only invariant differential operator is just the exterior differential”
would be to disregard how drastically they expanded its domain (even though
they ignored semi-infinite possibilities). It acts in the superspace of differential
forms and in the space of integrable forms, which is natural, since the space of
integrable forms is just the dual space to the superspace of differential forms.
Though Bernstein and Leites did not find any new invariant differential oper-
ator (this proves that an integration theory on supermanifolds containing an
analog of the Stokes formula can only be constructed with integrable forms),
they enlarged the domain of the exterior differential to the superspace of pseu-
dodifferential and pseudointegrable forms. These superspaces are not tensor
fields on Mm,n unless n = 1, but they are always tensor fields on the superman-
ifold Mb whose structure sheaf Oc is a completion of the sheaf of differential
                                  M
forms on M; namely, the sections of OM  c are arbitrary functions of differentials,
not only polynomial ones.
     (4) Bernstein and Leites did not consider indecomposible representations
ρ which are more natural in both the supersetting and for infinite dimensional
fibers. The first to consider indecomposible cases was Shmelev;54 his result
was, however, “not interesting”: there are no totally new operators, just com-
positions of the known ones with projections. For a review of indecomposible
representations of simple Lie superalgebras see Ref. 35.
     Integration and invariant differential operators for infinite di-
mensional fibers There are new operators invariant with respect to the
already considered (super)groups of diffeomorphisms or, equivalently, their Lie
superalgebras, if we let them act in the superspaces of sections of vector bun-
dles with infinite dimensional fibers. These operators of high order have no
counterparts on manifolds and are versions of the Berezin integral applied
fiber-wise. (A year after the talk with these results36 was delivered, I. Penkov
and V. Serganova interpreted some of these new operators as acting in the
superspaces of certain tensor fields on “curved” superflag and supergrassmann
supervarieties.42 )
     We hope to relate with some of these operators new topological invari-
ants (or perhaps old, like cobordisms, but from a new viewpoint). Recall that
since the de Rham cohomology of a supermanifold are the same as those of its
underlying manifold, the “old type” operators are inadequate to study “topo-
logical” invariants of supermanifolds. The operators described here and related
14 P. Grozman, D. Leites and I. Shchepochkina

to vector bundles of infinite rank lead to new (co)homology theories (we prefix
them with a “pseudo”). These pseudocohomologies provide us with invariants
different from de Rham cohomology; regrettably, never computed yet.
     The approach adopted here for the operators in the natural bundles with
infinite dimensional fibers on supermanifolds prompts us to start looking for
same on manifolds. From the explicit calculations in Grozman’s thesis,11 it is
clear that there are some new bilinear operators acting in the spaces of sections
of tensor fields with infinite dimensional fibers.

1.7   An infinitesimal version of Veblen’s problem
Denote F = K[[x]], where x = (u1 , . . . , un , ξ1 , . . . , ξm ) so that p(ui ) = 0̄ and
p(ξj ) = 1̄. Denote by (x) the maximal ideal in F generated by the xi . Define
a topology in F so that the ideals (x)r , r = 0, 1, 2, . . . are neighborhoods of
zero, i.e., two series are r-close if they coincide up to order r. We see that F
is complete with respect to this topology.
     Denote by vect(n|m) the Lie superalgebra of formal vector fields, i.e., of
continuous derivations of K[[x]]. By abuse of notations we denote derK[x], the
Lie superalgebra of polynomial vector fields, also by vect(n|m).
                                           ∂
     Define partial derivatives ∂i = ∂x      i
                                               ∈ vect(n|m) by setting ∂i (xj ) = δij
with super-Leibniz rule. Clearly, p(∂P   i )  =  p(xi ) and [∂i , ∂j ] = 0. Any element
D ∈ vect(n|m) is of the form D =             fi ∂i , where fi = D(xi ) ∈ F. We will
denote vect(n|m) by L. In L, define a filtration of the form L = L−1 ⊃ L0 ⊃
L1 ⊃ . . . setting
                     Lr = {D ∈ vect(n|m) | D(F) ⊂ (x)r+1 }.
This filtration defines a topology on L, the superspaces Lr being the base of
the topology, open neighborhoods of zero.
    Denote by L = ⊕Lr , where Lr = Lr /Lr+1 , the associated graded Lie
superalgebra. Clearly, L0 ≃ gl(n|m) with Eij ←→ xj ∂i .
    Let ρ be an irreducible representation of the Lie superalgebra L0 = gl(n|m)
with lowest weight in a superspace V . Define a vect(n|m)-module T (ρ) also
denoted by T (V ) by setting T (V ) = F ⊗K V . The superspace T (V ) evidently
inherits the topology of F. To any vector field D, assign the operator LD :
T (V ) −→ T (V ) — the Lie derivative — such that for f ∈ F and v ∈ V
                                                 X
               LD (f v) = D(f )v + (−1)p(D)p(f )    Dij ρ(Eij )(v),      (1.7.1)

where Dij = (−1)p(xi )(p(f )+1) ∂i fj . We will usually write just D instead of LD .
    The elements t ∈ T (V ) will be called tensor fields of type V . The modules
T (V ) are topological; their duals are spaces with discrete topology.
                                     Invariant operators and Standard Models   15

    Observe that even if V is finite dimensional, the elements of T (V ) are
generalized tensors as compared with the classical notion: the space V might
not be realized in the tensor product of co- and contra-variant tensors, only
as a subquotient of such; e.g., unlike the determinant (or trace, speaking on
the Lie algebra level), the supertrace is not realized in tensors and we have to
introduce new type of “tensors” — the λ-densities.
    For any L0 -module V with highest weight and any L0 -module W with
lowest weight set

       I(V ) = U (L) ⊗U(L0 ) V ;   T (W ) = HomU(L0 ) (U (L), W ),         (1.7.2)

where we have extended the action of L0 to a U (L0 )-action by setting L1 V = 0
and L1 W = 0. Clearly,
    a) I(V ) is an L-module with discrete topology.
    b) I(V )∗ ∼= T (V ∗ )
    c) definition of the tensor fields with L-action (1.7.1) is equivalent to the
one given by (1.7.2).
    Thus, instead of studying invariant maps T (W1 ) −→ T (W2 ) (or T (W1 ) ⊗
T (W2 ) −→ T (W3 ), etc.) we may study submodules — or, equivalently, singular
vectors — of I(V ) (resp. of I(V1 ) ⊗ I(V2 ), etc.). They are much easier to
describe.
    Further generalization of tensors. The highest weight theorem
Let
                          L = L−d ⊃ · · · ⊃ L0 ⊃ L1 ⊃ . . .
be a Lie superalgebra of vector fields with formal or polynomial coefficients and
endowed with a Weisfeiler filtration/grading described in what follows (for the
time being consider a “most natural” grading, like that in vect above). We
define the space of generalized tensor fields and its dual by the same formula
(1.7.2) as for the usual tensor fields given any L0 -module V with highest weight
and any L0 -module W with lowest weight such that L1 V = 0 and L1 W = 0.
     Observe that for the Lie algebra of divergence-free vector fields the spaces
T (W ) are the same as for vect. For some other Lie superalgebras the notion of
tensors we give is different because there are representations of L0 distinct from
tensor powers of the identity one. For example, for the Lie superalgebra L of
Hamiltonian vector fields h(2n|m) such is the spinor representation (for n = 0);
if we consider infinite dimensional fibers such is the oscillator representation
(for m = 0), and in the general case such is the spinor-oscillator representation,
cf. Ref. 37.
     Thus, the first step in the study of L-invariant operators is a description
of irreducible L0 -modules, at least in terms of the highest/lowest weight. For
16 P. Grozman, D. Leites and I. Shchepochkina

the majority of the L0 ’s this is not a big deal, but the catch is that for some
L0 ’s there is no easy highest/lowest weight theorem, even for finite dimensional
modules. We will encounter this phenomenon with as, the linear part of vas.
     An aside remark: being interested not only in representations of vecto-
rial algebras (with polynomial coefficients) but in their stringy analogs (with
Laurent coefficients), too, observe that vacuum over L0 can be degenerate.
     Problem For all Weisfeiler gradings of simple vectorial superalgebras L
describe conditions for the highest (lowest) weight under which the irreducible
quotient of the Verma module over L0 is finite dimensional and describe the
corresponding module (say, in terms of a character formula, cf. Ref. 42).
     Examples of generalized tensor fields Clearly, for L = vect(n|m)
we have L ≡ T (id), where id = Span(∂i | 1 ≤ i ≤ n + m) is the (space V of
the) identity representation of L0 = gl(V ) = gl(n|m). The spaces T (E i (id∗ ))
are denoted by Ωi ; their elements are called differential i-forms and the right
dual elements to ∂i are denoted by xbi = dxi , where p(xbi ) = p(xi ) + 1̄. In
particular, let F = Ω0 be the algebra of functions.
     The algebra Ω     b of arbitrary, not only polynomial, functions in xbi = dxi
is called the algebra of pseudodifferential forms. An important, as Shander
showed in Ref. 33 v. 31, Ch. 5, subspace Ω         b (λ) of homogeneous pseudodiffer-
ential forms of homogeneity degree λ ∈ K is naturally defined as functions of
homogeneity degree λ with respect to the hatted indeterminates.
     Define the space of volume forms Vol to be T (str); denote the volume
element by vol(x) or vol(u|θ). (Observe again that it is a bad habit to denote,
as many people still do, vol by dn udm θ: their transformation rules are totally
different, see, e.g., Refs. 5, 8.)
     The space of integrable i-forms is Σi = HomF (Ωi , Vol). In other words, in-
tegrable forms are Vol-valued polyvector fields. Pseudointegrable forms are de-
fined as elements of Σ    b = HomF (Ω,b Vol); the subspace Σ  b (λ) = HomF (Ωb (λ) , Vol)
of homogeneous forms is also important.
     Particular cases: a) m = 0. We see that Ωi = 0 for i > n and Σi = 0
for i < 0. In addition, the mapping vol 7→ x̂1 · · · x̂n defines an isomorphism of
Ωi with Σi preserving all structures.                                  R
     b) n = 0. In this case there is an even L-module morphism : Σ−m −→ K
called the Berezin integral. It is defined by the formula
          Z                           Z                             Y
             ξ1 · · · ξm vol = 1, and ξ1ν1 · · · ξm
                                                  νm
                                                      vol = 0 if       νi = 0.

                            R                  R
    We will also denote by     the composition   : Σ−m → K ֒→ Ω0 of the
Berezin integral and the natural embedding.
                                          Invariant operators and Standard Models         17

     c) m = 1. We generalize Ωi and Σj to the spaces Φλ of pseudodiffer-
entional and pseudointegral forms containing Ωi and Σj , where λ ∈ K. Let
x = (u1 , · · · , un , ξ). Consider a K-graded Ω-module Φ = ⊕Φλ (we assume
that deg x̂i = 1 ∈ K) generated by ξˆλ , where deg ξ̂ λ = λ and p(ξˆλ ) = 0̄, with
relations ξˆ · ξ̂ λ = ξ̂ λ+1 . Define the action of partial derivatives ∂i and ∂ˆj for
1 ≤ i, j ≤ n + 1 via ∂ˆj (xi ) = 0, ∂i (ξˆλ ) = 0, ∂ûi (ξˆλ ) = 0 and ∂ξ̂ (ξˆλ ) = λξˆλ−1 .
     On Φ, the derivations d, iD and LD consistent with the exterior derivation
d, the inner product iD and the Lie derivative LD on Ω are naturally defined.
     It is easy to see that Φ = ⊕Φλ is a supercommutative superalgebra.
     Clearly, Φ is a superspace of tensor fields and for ΦZ = ⊕r∈ZΦr we have a
sequence
                                        α         β
                               0 −→ Ω −→ ΦZ −→ Σ −→ 0                                     (∗)
where the maps α and β are defined by
                        α(ω) = ω ξˆ0 ,    β(û1 · · · ûn ξˆ−1 ) = vol.
Clearly, the homomorphisms α and β are consistent with the Ω-module struc-
ture and the operators d, iD and LD . The explicit form of the F-basis in Ω, Σ
and Φ easily implies that (∗) is exact.
1.8   Operators invariant with respect to nonstandard realizations
At the moment the L-invariant differential operators are described for all but
one series of simple vectorial Lie superalgebras in the standard realization.
Contrariwise, about operators invariant with respect to same in nonstandard
realizations almost nothing is known, except for vect(m|n; 1), see Ref. 36.
     For series, the standard realization is the one for which dim L/L0 is min-
imal; for exceptional algebras the notion of the standard realization is more
elusive, and since there are 1 to 4 realizations, it is reasonable and feasible to
consider all of them. It is also natural to consider hλ (2|2) and hλ (2|2; 1) as
exceptional algebras, especially at exceptional values of λ.
1.9   On description of irreducible L-modules
Having described vect(n|m)-invariant differentialR operators in tensor fields with
finite dimensional fibers (answer: only d, and if n = 0, m 6= 0), we consider
the quotients of T (V ) modulo the image of the invariant operator. It could be
that the quotient also contains a submodule. In the general case there are no
such submodules (Poincaré lemma), in other cases anything can happen, see
Refs. 27 and 26,28.
     Observe that to describe irreducible L-modules, it does not always suffice
to consider only one realization of L. It is like considering generalized Verma
18 P. Grozman, D. Leites and I. Shchepochkina

modules induced or co-induced from distinct parabolic subalgebras. Similarly,
the description of invariant operators must be performed from scratch in each
realization.
     Here we do not specifically consider the irreducible L-modules; so far, the
answers are known for tensors with finite dimensional fibers and in two cases
only: Ref. 20 (vle(3|6)) and Ref. 32 (k(1|n); weights of singular vectors are
corrected below).
2   Brief description of the exceptional algebras
To save space, we do not reproduce the details of definitions of exceptional su-
peralgebras, see Ref. 50. Thus,43,26,5 suffice to grasp the details of the theory;50
to catch on with the list of exceptions we P  consider.
     Some of the exceptional algebras g = i≥−d gi are isomorphic as abstract
ones; there are five abstract families altogether. We realize them as Lie super-
algebras of polynomial vector fields with a particular, Weisfeiler (shortly W-),
grading or filtration. In any W-grading (a) the sum of the terms of positive
degree is a maximal subalgebra of finite codimension and (b) the linear part,
g0 irreducibly acts on g−1 . If depth d = 1, then each g is constructed as the
Cartan prolong (or its generalization) of the pair (g−1 , g0 ). To construct kas,
still another generalization of the Cartan prolongation is applied. For these
generalizations, first described in Refs. 47 and 48, see Ref. 50. In Ref. 7 there
is given a 15-th regrading we missed in Ref. 50, and a nice interpretation of
the exceptional algebras in terms of g0̄ and the g0̄ -module, g1̄ . This interpre-
tation is convenient in some problems, but in interpretations of our results the
realization of g as (generalized) Cartan prolong is often more useful.
     We only recall that the classical Cartan prolong (g−1 , g0 )∗ is defined in-
ductively, as a subalgebra of vector fields in dim g−1 indeterminates with given
g−1 and the linear part g0 , and where for i > 0
                   gi+1 = {D ∈ vect(dim g−1 ) | [D, g−1 ] ⊂ gi .
    Hereafter vect(m|n) is the general vectorial Lie superalgebra on m even and
n odd indeterminates; svect(m|n) is its divergence-free or special subalgebra;
k(2m + 1|n) the contact algebra that preserves the Pfaffian equation α = 0,
where
                 X                        X                      X
    α1 = dt +        (pi dqi − qi dpi ) +   (ξj dηj + ηj dξj ) +     θk dθk .
                1≤i≤m                    j≤r                    k≥n−2r

For f ∈ C[t, p, q, Θ], where Θ = (ξ, η, θ), define the contact field Kf by setting:
                                           ∂         ∂f
                        Kf = (2 − E)(f )      − Hf +    E,
                                           ∂t        ∂t
                                               Invariant operators and Standard Models               19
              P        ∂
where E =          yi ∂y i
                           (here the yi are all the coordinates except t), and Hf is
               i
the hamiltonian field with Hamiltonian f that preserves dα1 :
                                                                 
               X ∂f ∂           ∂f ∂                    X ∂f ∂
          Hf =      (         −         ) − (−1)p(f )            .
                      ∂pi ∂qi   ∂qi ∂pi                   ∂θj ∂θj
                       i≤n                                                j≤m


Replacement of some of the θ’s in the above formula with ξ, η leads to obvious
modifications.
   The “odd” analog of the contact structure is given by the even form
                                   X
                      α0 = dτ +         (ξi dqi + qi dξi )
                                             1≤i≤n

and formula for the vector field Mf — the analogs of Kf — generated by
the function of τ, ξ, q are similar. The fields Mf span the “odd” contact Lie
superalgebra, m(n).
    The regradings are given after the dimension of the supermanifold in the
standard realization (r = 0, optional, marked by (∗)) after semicolon. Observe
that the codimension of L0 attains its minimum in the standard realization.

        Lie superalgebra                                  its Z-grading
         vect(n|m; r),                       deg ui = deg ξj = 1 for any i, j     (∗)
           0 ≤r ≤ m                                 deg ξj = 0 for 1 ≤ j ≤ r;
                                               deg ui = deg ξr+s = 1 for any i, s

            m(n; r),                     deg τ = 2, deg qi = deg ξi = 1 for any i     (∗)
           0 ≤ r ≤ n                    deg τ = deg qi = 2, deg ξi = 0 for 1 ≤ i ≤ r < n;
           r 6= n − 1                          deg qr+j = deg ξr+j = 1 for any j
           m(1|n; n)                      deg τ = deg qi = 1, deg ξi = 0 for 1 ≤ i ≤ n

          k(2n + 1|m; r),                                   deg t = 2 ,
           0 ≤ r ≤ [m]        deg pi = deg qi = deg ξj = deg ηj = deg θk = 1 for any i, j, k   (∗)
                     2
      r 6= k − 1 for m = 2k            deg t = deg ξi = 2, deg ηi = 0 for 1 ≤ i ≤ r ≤ [ m ];
                                                                                        2
           and n = 0                     deg pi = deg qi = deg θj = 1 for j ≥ 1 and all i
           k(1|2m; m)                     deg t = deg ξi = 1, deg ηi = 0 for 1 ≤ i ≤ m



     Now the last notations: hei(2n|m) is the Heisenberg algebra, it is isomor-
phic to k(2n + 1|m)− , the negative part of k(2n + 1|m); similarly, ab(m) is the
antibracket algebra, isomorphic to m(m)− .
     A. Sergeev central extension, as, of spe(4): we represent an arbitrary el-
ement A ∈ as as a pair A = x + d · z, where x ∈ spe(4), d ∈ C and z is the
central element. We define the bracket in as in its matrix realization in the
spinor representation:
                    ′                          ′           
   a    b              a    b′      ′         a    b       a     b′
             +d · z ,            +d   · z  =           ,               +tr cc̃′ ·z ,
   c −at               c′ −a′t                 c −at       c′ −a′t
20 P. Grozman, D. Leites and I. Shchepochkina

where ˜ is extended via linearity from matrices cij = Eij − Eji on which
c̃ij = ckl for any even permutation (1234) 7→ (ijkl).
      The five types of exceptional W-graded Lie superalgebras are given above
in their realizations as Cartan’s prolongs (g−1 , g0 )∗ or generalized Cartan’s
prolongs (g− , g0 )mk
                   ∗ for g− =     ⊕    gi expressed for d = 2 as (g−2 , g−1 , g0 )mk
                                                                                  ∗
                                  −d≤i≤−1
together with one of the serial Lie superalgebras as an ambient which contains
the exceptional one as a maximal subalgebra. The regradings R(r) of the
ambients given below are sometimes not of Weisfeiler type.

     vle(4|3; r) = (Π(Λ(3))/C · 1, cvect(0|3))∗ ⊂ vect(4|3; R),            r = 0, 1, K
     vas(4|4) = (spin, as)∗ ⊂ vect(4|4)
     kasξ (1|6; r) ⊂ k(1|6; r),   r = 0, 1ξ, 3ξ
        ξ
     kas (1|6; 3η) = (Vol0 (0|3), c(vect(0|3)))∗ ⊂ svect(4|3)
     mb(4|5; r) = (ab(4), cvect(0|3))m
                                     ∗ ⊂ m(4|5; R),          r = 0, 1, K
     ksle(9|6; r) = (hei(8|6), svect(0|4)3,4 )k∗ ⊂ k(9|6; r),    r = 0, 2, CK
     ksle(9|6; K) = (idsl(5) , Λ2 (id∗sl(5) ), sl(5))k∗ ⊂ svect(5|10; R)

    Certain regradings R(r) of the ambients are so highly nonstandard that
even the homogeneous fibers are of infinite dimension:
1) vle(4|3; r) = (Π(Λ(3)/C · 1), cvect(0|3))∗ ⊂ vect(4|3), r = 0, 1, K;
 r = 0: deg y = deg ui = deg ξi = 1;
 r = 1: deg y = deg ξ1 = 0, deg u2 = deg u3 = deg ξ2 = deg ξ3 = 1, deg u1 = 2;
 r = K: deg y = 0, deg ui = 2; deg ξi = 1.
2) vas(4|4) = (spin, as)∗ ⊂ vect(4|4);
3) kas ⊂ k(1|6; r), r = 0, 1, 3ξ; kas(1|6; 3η) ⊂ svect(4|3);
 r = 0: deg t = 2, deg ηi = 1; deg ξi = 1;
 r = 1: deg ξ1 = 0, deg η1 = deg t = 2, deg ξ2 = deg ξ3 = deg η2 = deg η3 = 1;
 r = 3ξ: deg ξi = 0, deg ηi = deg t = 1;
 r = 3η: deg ηi = 0, deg ξi = deg t = 1.
4) mb(4|5; r) = (ab(4), cvect(0|3))m  ∗ ⊂ m(4),     r = 0, 1, K;
 r = 0: deg τ = 2, deg ui = deg ξi = 1 for i = 0, 1, 2, 3;
 r = 1: deg τ = deg ξ0 = deg u1 = 2, deg u2 = deg u3 = deg ξ2 = deg ξ3 = 1;
 deg ξ1 = deg u0 = 0;
 r = K: deg τ = deg ξ0 = 3, deg u0 = 0, deg ui = 2; deg ξi = 1 for i > 0.
5) ksle(9|6; r) = (hei(8|6), svect3,4 (4))k∗ ⊂ k(9|6), r = 0, 2, K, CK;
 r = 0: deg t = 2, deg pi = deg qi = deg ξi = deg ηi = 1;
 r = 2: deg t = deg q3 = deg q4 = deg η1 = 2, deg q1 = deg q2 = deg p1 = deg p2
                                                  Invariant operators and Standard Models              21

  = deg η2 = deg η3 = deg ζ2 = deg ζ3 = 1; deg p3 = deg p4 = deg ζ1 = 0;
  r = K: deg t = deg qi = 2, deg pi = 0; deg ζi = deg ηi = 1;
  r = CK: deg t = deg q1 = 3, deg p1 = 0; deg q2 = deg q3 = deg q4 = deg ζ1
  = deg ζ2 = deg ζ3 = 2; deg p2 = deg p3 = deg p4 = deg η1 = deg η2 = deg η3 = 1.
     To determine the minimal ambient is important for our problem: every op-
erator invariant with respect to an algebra is, of course, invariant with respect
to any its subalgebra.
     Here is the list of nonpositive terms of the exceptional algebras. Notations:
c(g) denotes the trivial central extension with the 1-dimensional even center
generated by z; C[k] is the trivial g0 -module on which the central element z
from g0 chosen so that z|gi = i·idgi acts as multiplcation by k; a + ⊂ b denotes the
semidirect product in which a is the ideal; let d determine the Z-grading of g
and not belong to g, we shorthand g +   ⊃ C(az +bd) to ga,b ; Vol(n|m) is the space
of volume forms (densities) on the superspace of superdimension indicated,
subscript 0 singles the subspace with integral 0; T 1/2 is the representation in
the space of half-densities and T00 is the quotient of Vol 0 modulo constants
(over divergence-free algebra).
     Observe that none of the simple W-graded vectorial Lie superalgebras is
of depth > 3 and only two algebras are of depth 3: mb(4|5; K), for which we
have
                             mb(4|5; K)−3 ∼ = Π(idsl(2) ),
and another one, ksle(9|6; CK) = ck(11|9), for which we have :

                               ck(11|9)−3 ≃ Π(idsl(2) ⊗ C[−3]).

Here are the other terms gi for i ≤ 0 of the 15 exceptional W-graded algebras.

     g            g−2                      g−1                               g0                    r

  vle(4|3)          −                 Π(Λ(3)/C · 1)                      c(vect(0|3))              0
  vle(5|4)        C[−2]                 id ⊗ Λ(2)                            ⊂ T 1/2 (vect(0|2))
                                                              c(sl(2) ⊗ Λ(2) +                     1
  vle(3|6)       idsl(3)         id∗     ⊗ idsl(2) ⊗ C[−1]            sl(3) ⊕ sl(2) ⊕ Cz           K
                                   sl(3)
  vas(4|4)          −                      spin                              as                    0

  kas(1|6)        C[−2]                   Π(id)                             co(6)                  0
  kas(5|5)        Λ(1)           idsl(2) ⊗ idgl(2) ⊗ Λ(1)     (sl(2) ⊕ gl(2) ⊗ Λ(1)) +
                                                                                     ⊂ vect(0|1)   1ξ
  kas(4|4)          −                      Λ(3)                         Λ(3) ⊕ sl(1|3)             3ξ
  kas(4|3)          −                   Vol0 (0|3)                       c(vect(0|3))              3η

  mb(4|5)       Π(C[−2])                 Vol(0|3)                        c(vect(0|3))              0
  mb(5|6)        Λ(2)/C1              idsl(2) ⊗ Λ(2)                         ⊂ T 1/2 (vect(0|2))
                                                              c(sl(2) ⊗ Λ(2) +                     1
  mb(3|8)        idsl(3)       Π(id∗     ⊗ idsl(2) ⊗ C[−1])           sl(3) ⊕ sl(2) ⊕ Cz           K
                                   sl(3)
 ksle(9|6)        C[−2]                   Π(T0 0)                       svect(0|4)3,4              0
 ksle(11|9)    Π(idsl(1|3) )          idsl(2) ⊗ Λ(3)              (sl(2) ⊗ Λ(3))  +
                                                                                  ⊂ sl(1|3)        2
 ksle(5|10)         id                  Π(Λ2 (id∗ ))                        sl(5)                  K
                                                       
 ksle(9|11)   id∗     ⊗ Λ(1)    idsl(2) ⊗ idsl(3) ⊗ Λ(1)      sl(2) ⊕ (sl(3) ⊗ Λ(1) +
                                                                                    ⊂ vect(0|1))   CK
                sl(3)
22 P. Grozman, D. Leites and I. Shchepochkina

     In what follows, we write just f instead of Mf or Kf , and I instead of
M1 . So, f · g denotes Mf Mg or Kf Kg , not Mf g or Kf g . We shorthand
D : I(χ) −→ I(ψ) to χ = (a, b, c, d) −→ ψ = (e, f, g, h). Having selected a
basis of Cartan subalgebra, we use it for every regrading.
     The negated degree of the singular vector, i.e, the degree of the corre-
sponding operator, is denoted by d). We are sure that in some cases there are
singular vectors (operators) of degree higher than listed ones; in such cases
we write “in degrees indicated the singular vectors are ...” rather than “the
following are all possible singular vectors”. In what follows m1 is the nonzero
highest weight vector of the g0 -module V .

3   Singular vectors for g = vle(3|6)
We denote the indeterminates by x (even) and ξ (odd); the corresponding
partial derivatives by ∂ and δ. The Cartan subalgebra is spanned by
     h1 = −2 x4 ⊗ ∂4 −ξ1 ⊗ δ1 −ξ2 ⊗ δ2 −ξ3 ⊗ δ3 ,               h2 = −x2 ⊗ ∂2 − x3 ⊗ ∂3 − ξ1 ⊗ δ1 ,
     h3 = −x1 ⊗ ∂1 − x3 ⊗ ∂3 − ξ2 ⊗ δ2 ,                        h4 = −x1 ⊗ ∂1 − x2 ⊗ ∂2 − ξ3 ⊗ δ3

We consider the following negative operators from g0 :
        a1 = ∂4 ,     a12 = − x4 2 ∂4 − x4 ξ1 δ1 − x4 ξ2 δ2 − x4 ξ3 δ3 + ξ1 ξ2 ∂3 − ξ1 ξ3 ∂2 + ξ2 ξ3 ∂1


                    a2 = − x1 ∂1    − x2 ∂2 − x3 ∂3 + x4 ∂4 ,    a3 = x2 ∂2 + x3 ∂3 + ξ1 δ1
                    a4 = − x2 ∂1    + ξ1 δ2 ,                    a5 = − x3 ∂1 + ξ1 δ3
                    a6 = − x1 ∂2    + ξ2 δ1 ,                    a7 = x1 ∂1 + x3 ∂3 + ξ2 δ2
                    a8 = − x3 ∂2    + ξ2 δ3 ,                    a9 = − x1 ∂3 + ξ3 δ1
                    a10 = − x2 ∂3 + ξ3 δ2 ,                      a11 = x1 ∂1 + x2 ∂2 + ξ3 δ3


and the operators from g− :
                        n1 = δ1 ,           n4 = x4 δ3 − ξ1 ∂2 + ξ2 ∂1 ,       n7 = ∂1
                        n2 = δ2 ,           n5 = x4 δ2 − ξ1 ∂3 + ξ3 ∂1 ,       n8 = ∂2
                        n3 = δ3 ,           n6 = x4 δ1 − ξ2 ∂3 + ξ3 ∂2 ,       n9 = ∂3



The mi are the following elements of the irreducible g0 -module V :
                     m1 is the highest weight vector            m9 = a4 · a8 · m1
                     m2 = a12 · m1                              m10 = a8 · a8 · m1
                     m3 = a4 · m1                               m11 = a5 · m1
                     m4 = a8 · m1                               m12 = a12 · a12 · a12 · m1
                     m5 = a12 · a12 · m1                        m13 = a12 · a12 · a4 · m1
                     m6 = a12 · a4 · m1                         m14 = a12 · a12 · a8 · m1
                     m7 = a12 · a8 · m1                         m15 = a12 · a4 · a4 · m1
                     m8 = a4 · a4 · m1                          m16 = a12 · a4 · a8 · m1



Theorem In I(V ), there are only the following singular vectors of degree d):
1a) (k, k, l, l) −→ (k + 1, k + 1, l, l): n1 ⊗ m1 ;
1b) (k, k, k − 1, k − 1) −→ (k + 1, k, k, k − 1): n2 ⊗ m1 + n1 ⊗ m3 ;
                                         Invariant operators and Standard Models    23

1c) (k − 3, k, k, k − 1) −→ (k − 2, k, k, k): n3 ⊗ m1 + n2 ⊗ m4 + n1 ⊗ m9 ;
1d) (−k, k − 2, l, 1) −→ (−k − 1, k − 1, l, l), where k 6= 0
                                k n 6 ⊗ m1 + n 1 ⊗ m2 ;

1e) (−k, k − 2, k − 1, k − 1) −→ (−k − 1, k − 2, k, k), where k 6= 0, −1
                  k (n5 ⊗ m1 + n6 ⊗ m3 ) − n2 ⊗ m2 + n1 ⊗ m6 ;

1f) (−k, k + 1, k + 1, k) −→ (−k − 1, k + 1, k + 1, k + 1), where k 6= 0
     k (n4 ⊗ m1 − n5 ⊗ m4 + n6 ⊗ m9 ) + n3 ⊗ m2 + n2 ⊗ m7 + n1 ⊗ m16 ;

2a) (0, −2, k, k) −→ (0, 0, k − 1, k − 1): (n6 ·n1 ) ⊗ m1 ;

2b) (0, −2, 0, 0) −→ (0, −1, 1, 0):
                       (n5 ·n1 − n6 ·n2 ) ⊗ m1 + (n6 ·n1 ) ⊗ m3

2c) (1, 0, 0, −1) −→ (1, 1, 0, 0):
−(n8 +n4 ·n1 )⊗m1 +(n3 ·n1 )⊗m2 +(n9 +n5 ·n1 )⊗m4 +(n2 ·n1 )⊗m7 −(n6 ·n1 )⊗m9

2d) (−3, 0, 0, −1) −→ (−3, 1, 0, 0)
            (n8 + n4 ·n1 − 2 (n6 ·n3 )) ⊗ m1 + (n3 ·n1 ) ⊗ m2
            − (n9 + n5 ·n1 + 2 (n6 ·n2 )) ⊗ m4 + (n2 ·n1 ) ⊗ m7 − (n6 ·n1 ) ⊗ m9

2e) (0, k, −1, k + 1) −→ (0, k, 1, k + 1) (The dual cases were not calculated.)
     −k (1 + k) (n5 ·n2 ) ⊗ m1 − k (n5 ·n1 − k n6 ·n2 ) ⊗ m3 + (n6 ·n1 ) ⊗ m8

3a) (k − 2, k, k, k) −→ (k + 1, k + 1, k + 1, k + 1): (n3 ·n2 ·n1 ) ⊗ m1 ;
3b) (−3, −1, −1, −1) −→ (−2, 0, 0, 0) (The dual cases were not calculated.)
(n7 ·n1 +n8 ·n2 +n9 ·n3 −n4 ·n2 ·n1 −n5 ·n3 ·n1 −n6 ·n3 ·n2 ) ⊗ m1 − (n3 ·n2 ·n1 ) ⊗ m2

4   Singular vectors for g = vle(4|3)
Here g = vle(4|3), former w1 . In g0 = c(vect(0|3)) considered in the standard
grading, we take the usual basis of Cartan subalgebra, ξi ∂∂i , and z we identify
the g0 -module g−1 with Π(Λ(ξ)/C · 1), by setting

                      ∂i = Π(ξi );     ∂0 = Π(ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 ),
                      δi = sign(ijk)Π(ξj ξk ) for (i, j, k) ∈ S3 .
24 P. Grozman, D. Leites and I. Shchepochkina

We consider the following negative operators from g0 :
                     y1 = −x1 ∂2 + ξ2 δ1              y2 = −x2 ∂3 + ξ3 δ2
                     y3 = −x0 δ3 − ξ1 ∂2 + ξ2 ∂1      y4 = x1 ∂3 − ξ3 δ1
                     y5 = x0 δ2 − ξ1 ∂3 + ξ3 ∂1       y6 = x0 δ1 + ξ2 ∂3 − ξ3 ∂2


and the basis of Cartan subalgebra:
                     h0 = x1 ∂1 + x2 ∂2   + x3 ∂3 + x0 ∂0 + ξ1 δ1 + ξ2 δ2 + ξ3 δ3
                     h1 = x2 ∂2 + x3 ∂3   + ξ1 δ1
                     h2 = x1 ∂1 + x3 ∂3   + ξ2 δ2
                     h3 = x1 ∂1 + x2 ∂2   + ξ3 δ3


The mi are the following elements of the irreducible g0 -module V :
                m2 = y1 m1           m17 = y5 m1                  m54 = y2 y3   y4 m1
                m3 = y2 m1           m26 = y1 y5 m1               m57 = y3 y5   m1
                m7 = y3 m1           m31 = y3 y4 m1               m82 = y1 y3   y5 m1
                m8 = y4 m1           m32 = (y4 )2 m1              m94 = y3 y6 m1
                m12 = y1 y3 m1       m33 = y6 m1                  m148 = y3 y4 y5 m1
                m15 = y2 y3 m1       m46 = y1 y2 y5 m1            m150 = y5 y6 m1

and m320 = y3 y5 y6 m1 . Observe that our choice of ordering obscures the fact
that the vectors m129 , m148 , and m150 are proportional.
Theorem In I(V ) in degrees indicated, there are only the following singular
vectors:
    1a) λ −→ λ + (−1, 1, 1, 1), where 2λ1 = λ2 + λ3 + λ4 : ∂0 m1
    1b) (k, l, l, k − l + 1) −→ (k − 1, l + 1, l + 1, k − l + 1): ∂0 m7 + (k − l)δ3 ) m1
    1c) (k, k − 1, 1, k) −→ (k − 1, k, 1, k + 1):
                  ∂0 (m15 + (k − 2)m17 ) − (k − 1)δ2 m1 + δ3 m3

    1d) (k, l, k − l, k − l) −→ (k − 1, l, k − l + 1, k − l + 1):
∂0 (m26 +m31 +(1−k+2l)m33)+((k−2l)(1+l))δ1 m1 −(l+1)δ2 m2 +(l+1)δ3 m8

   1e) (1, 1, 0, 0) −→ (0, 1, 1, 0):
−2∂1 m2 + 2∂2 m1 + ∂0 (m82 + 2m94 )+ 2δ1 m7 + 2δ2 m12 + δ3 (m26 − m31 + 2m33 )

    1f) (0, 0, 0, −1) −→ (−1, 0, 0, 0):
       −∂1 m8 + ∂2 m3 − ∂3 m1
       +∂0 (m129 + m148 ) + δ1 (2m15 − m17 ) + δ2 (2m31 − m33 ) + δ3 (m46 + m54 )

    2a) λ −→ λ + (−2, 2, 2, 2), where λ1 = λ2 + λ3 + λ4 + 1: ∂02 m1
    2b) (k, k − 2, k − 2, 3) −→ (k − 2, k, k, 4): ∂02 m7 + 2∂0 δ3 m1
    2c) (k, k − 2, 2, k − 1) −→ (k − 2, k, 3, k + 1):
             ∂02 (m15 + (k − 4)m17 ) − 2(k − 3)∂0 δ2 m1 + 2∂0 δ3 m3
                                        Invariant operators and Standard Models   25


    2d) (k, 1, k − 1, k − 1) −→ (k − 2, 2, k + 1, k + 1):
  ∂02 (m26 + m31 + (3 − k)m33 ) + 2(k − 2)∂0 δ1 m1 − 2∂0 δ2 m2 + 2∂0 δ3 m8

    2e) (2, 1, 1, 1) −→ (0, 2, 2, 2):
              ∂02 m320 + 2∂1 ∂0 (m26 + m31 ) + 2∂1 δ1 m1 − 2∂1 δ2 m2
              +2∂1 δ3 m8 − 2∂2 ∂0 m15 + 2∂2 δ2 m1 − 2∂2 δ3 m3
              +2∂3 ∂0 m7 + 2∂3 δ3 m1 − 2∂0 δ1 m57 + ∂0 δ2 (−m82 + m94 )
              +∂0 δ3 (m148 + 2m150 ) − 2δ1 δ2 m7 − 2δ1 δ3 m17 + 2δ2 δ3 m33


    3a) λ −→ λ + (−3, 3, 3, 3), where λ1 = λ2 + λ3 + λ4 + 2:             ∂03 m1
    3b) (k, k − 3, k − 3, 4) −→ (k − 3, k, k, 6):     ∂03 m7 + 3∂02 δ3 m1
    3c) (k, k − 3, 3, k − 2) −→ (k − 3, k, 5, k + 1):
             ∂03 (m15 + (k − 6)m17 ) − 3(k − 5)∂02 δ2 m1 + 3∂02 δ3 m3

    3d) (k, 2, k − 2, k − 2) −→ (k − 3, 4, k + 1, k + 1):
  ∂03 (m26 + m31 + (5 − k)m33 ) + 3(k − 4)∂02 δ1 m1 − 3∂02 δ2 m2 + 3∂02 δ3 m8

    3e) (2k, k, k, k) −→ (2k − 3, k + 2, k + 2, k + 2):
               ∂03 m320 + (k + 1)∂1 ∂02 (m26 + m31 ) + k(k + 1)∂1 ∂0 δ1 m1
               −k(k + 1)∂1 ∂0 δ2 m2 + k(k + 1)∂1 ∂0 δ3 m8
               −(k + 1)∂2 ∂02 m15 + k(k + 1)∂2 ∂0 δ2 m1
               −k(k + 1)∂2 ∂0 δ3 m3 + (k + 1)∂3 ∂02 m7
               +k(k + 1)∂3 ∂0 δ3 m1 − (k + 1)∂02 δ1 m57
               +∂02 δ2 (−m82 + km94 ) + ∂0 δ3 (m148 + (k + 1)m150 )
               −k(k + 1)∂0 δ1 δ2 m7 − k(k + 1)∂0 δ1 δ3 m17
               +k(k + 1)∂0 δ2 δ3 m33 − (k − 1)k(k + 1)δ1 δ2 δ3 m1

Remarks Cases a) have an obvious generalization to any degree, cf. Ref. 23.
Some expressions can be shortened by an appropriate ordering of the elements
of the enveloping algebra, in other words, some vectors represent zero, e.g.,
m2 , m3 , m8 , m15 in cases 2e) and 3e). Being way behind the deadline, we did
not always perform such renormalization; the cases 2e) and 3e) are left as they
are to entertain the reader. The following case — g = mb(4|5) — is strikingly
similar.
26 P. Grozman, D. Leites and I. Shchepochkina

5   Singular vectors for g = mb(4|5) (after Kochetkov)
Here g = mb(4|5), former w2 . Recall that in terms of generating functions we
identify the g0 -module g−2 with Π(C · 1); we denote by 1 ∈ m(4) the image of
Π(1); so f 1 denotes Mf M1 . We identify g−1 with Π(Λ(ξ)) by setting
             x0 = Π(1),          xi = sign(ijk)Π(ξj ξk ) for (i, j, k) ∈ S3 ,
             η0 = Π(ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 ),        ηi = Π(ξi ).
Let V be an irreducible finite dimensional g0 -module with highest weight Λ,
and vΛ the corresponding vector; let f ∈ I(V ) be a nonzero singular vector.
Theorem (23 ) In I(V ), there are only the following singular vectors:
1) Λ = ( 12 , 21 , 12 , 3), and m = 1 or 3
                        P                         P
           η0m ⊗ v +           η0m−1 xi ⊗ vi +           η0m−1 ηi ⊗ wi + η0m−1 x0 ⊗ vΛ
                       1≤i≤3                     1≤i≤3

2) Λ = (0, 0, 0; 2) and m = 3
                             P
                        η0 (   ηi xi ) ⊗ vΛ + 2η0 1 ⊗ vΛ ;
                                0≤i≤3

3) Λ = (0, 0, 0; a): ∂02 ⊗ vΛ .
4) Λ = (0, 0, −1; 0) for m = 1 or 3
                    X                    X
     ∂0m ⊗ vΛ +          ∂0m−1 δi ⊗ wi +   ∂0m−1 ∂j ⊗ vj , where v3 = vΛ .
                 1≤i≤3                           1≤i≤3

Remark In Ref. 23 no description of the vj and wj is given; now we can
compare the above with our latest result:
     We give the weights with respect to the following basis of Cartan subalge-
bra:
                  h1 = τ ;               h2 = −q0 ξ0 + q1 ξ1 ,
                   h3 = −q0 ξ0 + q2 ξ2 ,           h4 = −q0 ξ0 + q3 ξ3 .
    For the negative elements of g0 we take

           y1 = q2 ξ1 ,         y2 = q3 ξ2 ,                  y3 = −q0 q1 + ξ2 ξ3 ,
           y4 = −q3 ξ1 , y5 = −q0 q2 − ξ1 ξ3 , y6 = −q0 q3 + ξ1 ξ2 .
The mi are the following elements of the irreducible g0 -module V :
               m2 = y1 m1 ,
                                      m17 = y5 m1               m57 = y3 y5 m1
               m3 = y2 m1 ,
                                      m24 = y1 y2 y3 m1         m91 = y2 y3 y5 m1
               m5 = y1 y2 m1
                                      m30 = y2 y5 m1            m94 = y3 y6 m1
               m7 = y3 m1 ,
                                      m31 = y3 y4 m1            m148 = y3 y4 y5 m1
               m8 = y4 m1 ,
                                      m33 = y6 m1               m150 = y5 y6 m1
               m12 = y1 y3 m1
                                         Invariant operators and Standard Models   27

and m320 = y3 y5 y6 m1 . Observe that our choice of ordering obscures the fact
that some of the vectors either are proportional or represent zero.
Theorem In I(V ), there are only the following singular vectors:
1a) λ −→ λ + (−1, 1, 1, 1), where λ1 = λ2 + λ3 + λ4 : ξ0 m1 .
1b) (−k + 2l − 2, k, l, l) −→ (−k + 2l − 3, k + 1, l, l): −kq1 m1 + ξ0 m7
1c) (k, k, k + 1, k + 1) −→ (k − 1, k, k + 2, k + 1):

                             −kq1 m2 − kq2 m1 + ξ0 m12

1d) (2k + 1, k, 0, k + 1) −→ (2k, k, 1, k + 1)

                     q1 m2 − kq2 m1 + ξ0 (m12 − (k + 1)m17 )

1e) (k + 3, k, k, k − 1) −→ (k + 2, k, k, k)

−(k−3)q1 (m5 +m8 )+2(k−3)q2 m3 −2(k−3)q3 m1 +ξ0 (m24 −3m30 +m31 +5m33 )

1f) (2k + 1, k, k, 1) −→ (2k, k, k, 2)
q1 (m5 +(k−1)m8 )−kq2 m3 +k(k−1)q3 m1 +ξ0 (m24 −(k+1)m30 +(k−1)m31 +(k 2 +1)m33 )
1g) (3, 1, 1, 1) −→ (2, 0, 0, 0)
                 q0 m1 − q1 (m132 + m148 ) + q2 m91 − q3 m57 − ξ0 m320
                 +ξ1 m7 + ξ2 m12 − ξ3 (−m30 + m31 )

2a) λ −→ λ + (−2, 2, 2, 2), where λ1 = λ2 + λ3 + λ4 + 2: ξ02 m1 .
2b) (2k, −2, k, k) −→ (2k − 2, 0, k + 1, k + 1): ξ02 m7 + 2q1 ξ0 m1 .
2c) (2k, k − 1, −1, k) −→ (2k − 2, k, 1, k + 1)

                 ξ02 (m12 − (k + 1)m17 ) + 2q1 ξ0 m2 − 2kq2 ξ0 m1

2d) (2k + 2, k, k, 0) −→ (2k, k + 1, k + 1, 2)
                    ξ02 (−m30 + m31 + (k + 1)m33 ) + q1 ξ0 (m5 + m8 )
                    −2q2 ξ0 m3 + 2kq3 ξ0 m1

2e) (2k, 0, 0, 0) −→ (2k − 2, 0, 0, 0)

                    ((3 − k) + q0 ξ0 + q1 ξ1 ) + q2 ξ2 + q3 ξ3 ) m1

3a) λ −→ λ + (−3, 3, 3, 3), where λ1 = λ2 + λ3 + λ4 + 4: ξ0 m1 .
3b) (2k + 1, −3, k, k) −→ (2k − 2, 0, k + 2, k + 2): ξ03 m7 + 3q1 ξ02 m1 .
3c) (2k + 1, k + 1, −2, k) −→ (2k − 2, k + 4, 1, k + 2)

              ξ03 (m12 − (k + 2)m17 ) + 3q1 ξ02 m2 − 3(k + 1)q2 ξ02 m1
28 P. Grozman, D. Leites and I. Shchepochkina

3d) (2k + 3, k, k, −1) −→ (2k, k + 2, k + 2, 2)
               ξ03 (m24 − 2m30 + (3 + k)m33 ) + q1 ξ02 ((2 − k)m5 + (1 + k)m8 )
               −3q2 ξ02 m3 + 3(1 + k)q3 ξ02 m1

3e) (2, 0, 0, 0) −→ (−1, 1, 1, 1)
                        (q0 ξ02 + 3ξ03 + q1 ξ0 ξ1 + q2 ξ0 ξ2 + q3 ξ0 ξ3 ) m1

3f) (k + 2, k, k, k) −→ (k − 1, k + 1, k + 1, k + 1)
          ξ03 m320 + (−2 + k)q0 ξ02 m1 + q1 ξ02 (m132 + m148 + (1 − k)m150 )
          +q2 ξ02 (−m91 + (−1 + k)m94 ) + (2 − k)q3 ξ02 m57
          −(−3 + k)(−2 + k)ξ0 m1 + (−2 + k)ξ02 ξ1 m7 ) + (−2 + k)ξ02 ξ2 m12
          +ξ02 ξ3 ((−2 + k)m30 + (2 − k)m31 ) − (−2 + k)(−1 + k)kq1 q2 q3 m1
          +q1 q2 ξ0 (m24 − km30 + (−2 + k)m31 + (2 − 2k + k 2 )m33 )
          +q1 q3 ξ0 ((−2 + k)m12 − (−2 + k)km17 ) − (−2 + k)(−1 + k)q1 ξ0 ξ1 m1
          −(−2 + k)kq1 ξ0 ξ2 m2 + q1 ξ0 ξ3 ((2 − k)m5 + (−2 + k)km8 )
          +(−2 + k)(−1 + k)(q2 q3 ξ0 m7 − (−2 + k)(−1 + k)q2 ξ0 ξ2 m1
          −(−2 + k)(−1 + k)q2 ξ0 ξ3 m3 − (−2 + k)(−1 + k)q3 ξ0 ξ3 m1


6     Singular vectors for g = mb(3|8)
We give the weights with respect to the following basis of Cartan subalgebra:

        H1 = 12 τ + 23 q1 ξ1 − 12 q2 ξ2 − 12 q3 ξ3 − 21 q4 ξ4 ;
        H2 = −q1 ξ1 + q2 ξ2 ,        H3 = −q1 ξ1 + q3 ξ3 ,        H3 = −q1 ξ1 + q4 ξ4 .

The basis elements of g− are denoted by

                                       q0    q1    q2   q3 ,
                                       I     ξ1    ξ2   ξ3 ,

and
          A = −q0 q1 + ξ2 ξ3 ,        B = −q0 q2 − ξ1 ξ3 ,        C = −q0 q3 + ξ1 ξ2 .
Theorem In I(V ), there are only the following singular vectors calculated
up to dualization (though some dual vectors are also given):
1a) (k, 0, l, l) −→ (k + 1, 0, l − 1, l − 1): A ⊗ m1 ;
1b) (k, l, −k, l + 1) −→ (k − 1, l, −k + 1, l + 1), where k 6= 0, −l
      k q1 ⊗ (q2 ξ1 ·m1 ) − (k + l) B ⊗ (ξ0 ·m1 ) − k (k + l) q2 ⊗ m1 + A ⊗ (ξ0 ·q2 ξ1 ·m1 ) .
                                               Invariant operators and Standard Models              29

1c) (k, l, l, 2) −→ (k + 1, l − 1, l − 1, 2), where l 6= 2

               A ⊗ (q2 ξ1 ·q3 ξ2 ·m1 ) − B ⊗ (q3 ξ2 ·m1 ) − (2 − l) C ⊗ m1 .

1d) (k, l, l, 1 − k) −→ (k − 1, l, l, 2 − k), where k + l 6= 1
              −k q1 ⊗ (q3 ξ1 ·m1 ) − B ⊗ (ξ0 ·q3 ξ2 ·m1 ) − k (1 − k − l) q3 ⊗ m1
              −(1 − k − l) C ⊗ (ξ0 ·m1 ) − k q2 ⊗ (q3 ξ2 ·m1 ) − A ⊗ (ξ0 ·q3 ξ1 ·m1 ) .

1e) (k, l, 1, l + 1) −→ (k + 1, l − 1, 1, l − 1), where l 6= 1

                             (1 − l) B ⊗ m1 + A ⊗ (q2 ξ1 ·m1 ) .

1f) (k, −k − 1, l, l) −→ (k − 1, −k + 1, l, l), where k 6= 0
                                  k q1 ⊗ m1 + A ⊗ (ξ0 ·m1 ) .

2a) (0, −1, l, l) −→ (0, 0, l − 1, l − 1): (q1 ·A) ⊗ m1 ;
2b) (0, −1, 1, 1) −→ (0, −1, 1, 0)
                           (q2 ·A + q1 ·B) ⊗ m1 + (q1 ·A) ⊗ (q2 ξ1 ·m1 ) .

2c) (2, 0, 0, −1) −→ (2, 0, −1, −1)
     2 ξ2 ⊗ m1 + 2 ξ3 ⊗ (q3 ξ2 ·m1 ) − 2 (q1 ·A) ⊗ (q2 ξ1 ·q3 ξ2 ·m1 ) + 2 (q2 ·A) ⊗ (q3 ξ2 ·m1 )
     −2 (q3 ·A) ⊗ m1 + (B·A) ⊗ (ξ0 ·q3 ξ2 ·m1 ) − (C·A) ⊗ (ξ0 ·m1 )

2d) (−4, 3, 3, 2) −→ (−4, 3, 2, 2)
       −2 (q1 ·A) ⊗ (q2 ξ1 ·q3 ξ2 ·m1 ) − ξ2 ⊗ m1 − ξ3 ⊗ (q3 ξ2 ·m1 ) − (C·A) ⊗ (ξ0 ·m1 )
       −3 ( q1 ·C) ⊗ m1 + (q3 ·A) ⊗ m1 + 3 (q1 ·B) ⊗ (q3 ξ2 ·m1 ) − (q2 ·A) ⊗ (q3 ξ2 ·m1 )
       + (B·A) ⊗ (ξ0 ·q3 ξ2 ·m1 ) .

2e) (0, k, 0, k + 1) −→ (0, k − 1, 1, k)
                                         
                   (q1 ·A) ⊗ (q2 ξ1 )2 ·m1 + (1 − k) (q1 ·B) ⊗ (q2 ξ1 ·m1 )
                   +(1 − k) (q2 ·A) ⊗ (q2 ξ1 ·m1 ) + (−1 + k) k (q2 ·B) ⊗ m1 .

2f) (0, 1, 0, 2) −→ (0, 0, 0, 2)
                                  
     (q1 ·A) ⊗ (q2 ξ1 )2 ·q3 ξ2 ·m1 − (q1 ·B) ⊗ (q2 ξ1 ·q3 ξ2 ·m1 )
     −2 (q1 ·C) ⊗ (q2 ξ1 ·m1 ) − (q2 ·A) ⊗ (q2 ξ1 ·q3 ξ2 ·m1 )
     +2 (q2 ·B) ⊗ (q3 ξ2 ·m1 ) + 2 (q2 ·C) ⊗ m1 − 2 (q3 ·A) ⊗ (q2 ξ1 ·m1 ) + 2 (q3 ·B) ⊗ m1 .

3a) (−3, 2, 2, 2) −→ (−2, 1, 1, 1)
         − q0 ⊗ m1 − (ξ1 ·A) ⊗ m1 − (ξ2 ·B) ⊗ m1 − (ξ3 ·C) ⊗ m1 − (q1 ·C·B) ⊗ m1
         + (q2 ·C·A) ⊗ m1 − (q3 ·B·A) ⊗ m1 + (C·B·A) ⊗ (ξ0 ·m1 ) .
30 P. Grozman, D. Leites and I. Shchepochkina

3a∗ ) (−2, 2, 2, 2) −→ (−3, 2, 2, 2)
    −4 I ⊗ m1 − 2 q0 ⊗ (ξ0 ·m1 ) + 2 (ξ1 ·q1 ) ⊗ m1 − 2 (ξ1 ·A) ⊗ (ξ0 ·m1 )
    +2 (ξ2 ·q2 ) ⊗ m1 − 2 (ξ2 ·B) ⊗ (ξ0 ·m1 ) + 2 (ξ3 ·q3 ) ⊗ m1 − 2 (ξ3 ·C) ⊗ (ξ0 ·m1 )
    −2 (q1 ·C·B) ⊗ (ξ0 ·m1 ) + 2 (q2 ·q1 ·C) ⊗ m1 + 2 (q2 ·C·A) ⊗ (ξ0 ·m1 )
                                                                                             
    −2 (q3 ·q1 ·B) ⊗ m1 + 2 (q3 ·q2 ·A) ⊗ m1 − 2 (q3 ·B·A) ⊗ (ξ0 ·m1 ) + C·B·A ⊗ ξ02 ·m1

3b) (1 − k, k, k, k) −→ (−2 − k, k + 1, k + 1, k + 1), where k 6= −1, 0, 1
                                                          
      −2 k (1 + k) I ⊗ (ξ0 ·m1 ) − (1 + k) q0 ⊗ ξ0 2 ·m1 + k (1 + k) (ξ1 ·q1 ) ⊗ (ξ0 ·m1 )
                                    
      − (1 + k) (ξ1 ·A) ⊗ ξ0 2 ·m1 + k (1 + k) (ξ2 ·q2 ) ⊗ (ξ0 ·m1 )
                                    
      − (1 + k) (ξ2 ·B) ⊗ ξ0 2 ·m1 + k (1 + k) (ξ3 ·q3 ) ⊗ (ξ0 ·m1 )
                                                                    
      − (1 + k) (ξ3 ·C) ⊗ ξ0 2 ·m1 − (1 + k) (q1 ·C·B) ⊗ ξ0 2 ·m1
                                                                        
      +k (1 + k) (q2 ·q1 ·C) ⊗ (ξ0 ·m1 ) + (1 + k) (q2 ·C·A) ⊗ ξ0 2 ·m1
      −k (1 + k) (q3 ·q1 ·B) ⊗ (ξ0 ·m1 )
      − (−1 + k) k (1 + k) (q3 ·q2 ·q1 ) ⊗ m1
                                                                             
      +k (1 + k) (q3 ·q2 ·A) ⊗ (ξ0 ·m1 ) − (1 + k) (q3 ·B·A) ⊗ ξ0 2 ·m1
                             
      + (C·B·A) ⊗ ξ0 3 ·m1

3b∗ ) (k, 2, 2, 2) −→ (k + 3, 0, 0, 0): C·B·A ⊗ m1 .
4a) (0, 2, 2, 1) −→ (2, 0, 0, 0)
          (q0 ·A) ⊗ (q2 ξ1 ·q3 ξ2 ·m1 ) − (q0 ·B) ⊗ (q3 ξ2 ·m1 ) + (q0 ·C) ⊗ m1
          + (ξ1 ·B·A) ⊗ (q3 ξ2 ·m1 ) − (ξ1 ·C·A) ⊗ m1 + (ξ2 ·B·A) ⊗ (q2 ξ1 ·q3 ξ2 ·m1 )
          + (ξ2 ·C·A) ⊗ (q2 ξ1 ·m1 ) − (ξ2 ·C·B) ⊗ m1 + (ξ3 ·C·A) ⊗ (q2 ξ1 ·q3 ξ2 ·m1 )
          − (ξ3 ·C·B) ⊗ (q3 ξ2 ·m1 ) + (q1 ·C·B·A) ⊗ (q2 ξ1 ·q3 ξ2 ·m1 )
          − (q2 ·C·B·A) ⊗ (q3 ξ2 ·m1 ) + (q3 ·C·B·A) ⊗ m1


7  Singular vectors for g = ksle(5|10)
                          P
We set: δij = ∂θ∂ij +                 θkl ∂m ; e.g.,
                          even permutations (ijklm)

                                   ∂
                          δ12 =   ∂θ12
                                         + θ34 ∂5 + θ45 ∂3 − θ35 ∂4 ,
                                   ∂
                          δ13 =   ∂θ13
                                         + θ25 ∂4 − θ24 ∂5 − θ45 ∂2 ,
                                   ∂
                          δ14 =   ∂θ14
                                         + θ23 ∂5 + θ35 ∂2 − θ25 ∂3 , etc.

The x-part of the elements of g0 = sl(5) is obvious. The negative elements are:
                                    X
                      yij = xi ∂j +     θjk δki for i < j
                                                k

and the basis of Cartan subalgebra is hi = yii − yi+1,i+1 .
                                                    Invariant operators and Standard Models                       31

     Let us estimate the possible degree of invariant operators. Since g0̄ ≃
svect(5|0), and the grading is consistent, wee see that the degree of the singular
vector can not exceed 2 × 2 + 10 = 14: each element from g−1 can only
contribute once and the degree of singular vector of the svect(5|0) modules can
not exceed 2; each counted with weight 2. In reality, the degree of singular
vectors is much lower, even with infinite dimensional fibers. To compute the
singular vectors directly is possible on modern computers, but hardly on a
workstation; the inbuilt Mathematica’s restrictions aggravate the problem.
     Still, even simple-minded direct calculations provide us with several first
and second order operators. The only “known” operator, the exterior differen-
tial, is inhomogeneous in the consistent grading and consists of parts of degree
1 and parts of degree 2. To match these parts with our operators is a problem.
     The mi are the following elements of the irreducible g0 -module V :
                      m1 is the highest weight vector
                                                                m18 = − y53 · m1
                      m2 = y21 · m1
                                                                m24 = y21 · y32 · y43 · m1
                      m3 = y32 · m1
                                                                m25 = y21 · y32 · y54 · m1
                      m4 = y43 · m1
                                                                m30 = − y21 · y42 · m1
                      m5 = y54 · m1
                                                                m31 = − y21 · y53 · m1
                      m7 = y21 · y32 · m1
                                                                m36 = y32 · y43 · y54 · m1
                      m8 = y21 · y43 · m1
                                                                m40 = − y32 · y53 · m1
                      m9 = y21 · y54 · m1
                                                                m44 = − y43 · y31 · m1
                      m11 = y32 · y43 · m1
                                                                m48 = − y54 · y31 · m1
                      m12 = y32 · y54 · m1
                                                                m49 = − y54 · y42 · m1
                      m14 = y43 · y54 · m1
                                                                m51 = − y41 · m1
                      m16 = − y31 · m1
                                                                m52 = − y52 · m1
                      m17 = − y42 · m1



                                                              m175 = − y21 · y32 · y32 · y53 · m1
        m70 = y21 · y32 · y43 · y54 · m1
                                                              m181 = − y21 · y32 · y43 · y53 · m1
        m73 = − y21 · y32 · y42 · m1
                                                              m184 = − y21 · y32 · y54 · y42 · m1
        m74 = − y21 · y32 · y53 · m1
                                                              m187 = − y21 · y32 · y52 · m1
        m83 = − y21 · y54 · y42 · m1
                                                              m241 = − y32 · y43 · y54 · y31 · m1
        m86 = − y21 · y52 · m1
                                                              m250 = − y32 · y54 · y41 · m1
        m101 = − y32 · y43 · y53 · m1
                                                              m254 = y32 · y31 · y53 · m1
        m115 = − y43 · y54 · y31 · m1
                                                              m258 = − y32 · y51 · m1
        m124 = − y54 · y41 · m1
                                                              m279 = y43 · y31 · y53 · m1
        m127 = y31 · y42 · m1
                                                              m291 = y54 · y31 · y42 · m1
        m128 = y31 · y53 · m1
                                                              m298 = y31 · y52 · m1
        m130 = y42 · y53 · m1
                                                              m301 = y53 · y41 · m1
        m132 = − y51 · m1
                                                              m397 = − y21 · y32 · y32 · y43 · y53 · m1
        m171 = y21 · y32 · y32 · y43 · y54 · m1
                                                              m539 = y32 · y43 · y31 · y53 · m1


The Cartan subalgebra is spanned by
     h1 = x1 ∂1   − θ12 δ12 − θ13 δ13   − θ14 δ14 − θ15 δ15   − x2 ∂2 − θ12 δ12 − θ23 δ23   − θ24 δ24 − θ25 δ25
     h2 = x2 ∂2   − θ12 δ12 − θ23 δ23   − θ24 δ24 − θ25 δ25   − x3 ∂3 − θ13 δ13 − θ23 δ23   − θ34 δ34 − θ35 δ35
     h3 = x3 ∂3   − θ13 δ13 − θ23 δ23   − θ34 δ34 − θ35 δ35   − x4 ∂4 − θ14 δ14 − θ24 δ24   − θ34 δ34 − θ45 δ45
     h4 = x4 ∂4   − θ14 δ14 − θ24 δ24   − θ34 δ34 − θ45 δ45   − ξ1 ∂5 − θ15 δ15 − θ25 δ25   − θ35 δ35 − θ45 δ45



Theorem           In I(V ) in degree d), there are only the following singular vectors
32 P. Grozman, D. Leites and I. Shchepochkina

(computed for degree 2 up to dualization):
1a) (k, l, 0, 0) −→ (k, l + 1, 0, 0): δ12 ⊗ m1 ;
1a∗ ) (0, 0, k, l) −→ (0, 0, k − 1, l), where k 6= 0 and k + l + 1 6= 0 b

      2k (1 + k + l) δ45 ⊗ m1 − 2 (1 + k + l) δ35 ⊗ m4
      +2δ25 ⊗ ((1 + k − l) m11 + 2 l m17 )
      +2δ15 ⊗ (3 (−1 + k − l) m24 − 2 (−1 + 2 k − 2 l) m44 + 2 (−1 + 2 k − l) m51 )
      +2δ34 ⊗ (m14 − (1 + k) m18 ) + 2δ24 ⊗ (m36 + (1 + k) m40 − 2 m49 + 2 m52 )
      −2δ23 ⊗ (m101 + 2 m130 )
      +2δ14 ⊗(3 m70 + 3 (−1+k) m74 − 4 m115 + 2 m124 − 2 (−1+2 k) m128 − 2 m132 )
      −2δ13 ⊗ (3 m181 − 4 m279 + 2 m301 ) + δ12 ⊗ (m397 − 4 m539 )

1b) (k, l, −k − 1, 0) −→ (k + 1, l − 1, −k, 0), where l 6= 0

                                 −l δ13 ⊗ m1 + δ12 ⊗ m3

1b∗ ) (0, k, l, −k − 1) −→ (0, k − 1, l + 1, −k), where k 6= 0, −1 and l 6= −1

      k(1 + k)(1 + l)δ35 ⊗ m1 − (1 + k)(1 + l)δ25 ⊗ m3
      +δ15 ⊗ ((1 + k) (1 + k − l) m7 − (1 + k) (k − 2 l) m16 )
      +k(1 + l)δ34 ⊗ m5 − (1 + l)δ24 ⊗ m12
      +δ23 ⊗ (m36 − (1 + k) m40 − (1 + k) m49 − k (1 + k) m52 )
      +δ14 ⊗ ((1 + k − l) m25 − (k − 2 l) m48 )
      +δ13 ⊗ (m70 − m74 + (1 + k) m83 + k m86 − 2 m115 + 2 m124 + (2 + k) m128
                    
      − 2 + k 2 m132 − δ12 ⊗ (m184 − k m258 − 2 m291 − k m298 )

1c) (k, 0, l, −l − 1) −→ (k + 1, 0, l − 1, −l), where l 6= 0

                         l δ14 ⊗ m1 − δ13 ⊗ m4 + δ12 ⊗ m17

1c∗ ) (k, −k − 1, 0, l) −→ (k − 1, −k, 0, l − 1), where k 6= 0 and l 6= 0

            −k lδ25 ⊗ m1 + l δ15 ⊗ m2 + k δ24 ⊗ m5 − k δ23 ⊗ m18 − δ14 ⊗ m9
            +δ13 ⊗ m31 + δ12 ⊗ (m86 + (1 + k) m132 )

1d) (k, l, −k − l − 2, 0) −→ (k − 1, l, −k − l − 1, 0), where k 6= 0 and k + l + 1 6= 0

                       k(1 + k + l)δ23 ⊗ m1 − (1 + k + l)δ13 ⊗ m2
                       +δ12 ⊗ (m7 + (−1 − k) m16 )

b Hereafter in similar statements the reader can check our restrictions: the coefficient of
⊗ m1 must not vanish.
                                                       Invariant operators and Standard Models                      33

1d∗ ) (0, k, l, −k − l − 2) −→ (0, k − 1, l, −k − l − 1), where k 6= 0 and k + l + 1 6= 0
         k(1 + k + l)δ34 ⊗ m1 − (1 + k + l)δ24 ⊗ m3 + δ23 ⊗ (m11 − (1 + k) m17 )
         +δ14 ⊗ ((1+k−l) m7 + 2 l m16 ) + δ13 ⊗ (m24 + (1 + k) m30 − 2 m44 + 2 m51 )
         −δ12 ⊗ (m73 − 2 m127 )

1e) (k, 0, 0, l) −→ (k + 1, 0, 0, l − 1), where l 6= 0

                        l δ15 ⊗ m1 − δ14 ⊗ m5 + δ13 ⊗ m18 + δ12 ⊗ m52
1f) (k, −k − 1, l, −l − 1) −→ (k − 1, −k, l − 1, −l), where k 6= 0 and l 6= 0, −1
         (k l − 1 − l)δ24 ⊗ m1 + k(1 + l)δ23 ⊗ m4 + l(1 + l)δ14 ⊗ m2
         − (1 + l) δ13 ⊗ m8 + δ12 ⊗ (m24 + l m30 − (1 + k) m44 + (1 + k) (1 + l) m51 )

2a) (k, 0, 0, 1) −→ (k + 1, 1, 0, 0)

                                  δ15 δ12 m1 − δ14 δ12 m5 + δ13 δ12 m18

2b) (k, −k − 1, 0, 1) −→ (k − 1, −k + 1, 0, 0), where k 6= 0

    −k δ25 δ12 m1 +δ15 δ12 m2 +k δ24 δ12 m5 −δ14 δ12 m9 −k δ23 δ12 m18 +δ13 δ12 m31

8     Singular vectors for g = ksle(9|11)
Consider the following negative operators from g0 :
             y1 = x2 ∂1 − θ13 δ23 − θ14 δ24 − θ15 δ25
                                                               y5 = −x3 ∂1 − θ12 δ23 + θ14 δ34 + θ15 δ35
             y2 = x3 ∂2 − θ12 δ13 − θ24 δ34 − θ25 δ35
                                                               y6 = −δ13 − θ25 ∂4 + θ24 ∂5 + θ45 ∂2
             y3 = δ12 + θ34 ∂5 + θ45 ∂3 − θ35 ∂4
                                                               y7 = −δ23 − θ14 ∂5 − θ45 ∂1 + θ15 ∂4
             y4 = x5 ∂4 − θ14 δ15 − θ24 δ25 − θ34 δ35


and the operators from g− :
             n1 = ∂4                                           n10 = ξ1 ∂1 + θ12 δ25 + θ13 δ35 + θ14 δ45
             n2 = ∂5                                           n11 = x4 ∂2 − θ12 δ14 + θ23 δ34 − θ25 δ45
             n3 = δ14 + θ23 ∂5 + θ35 ∂2   − θ25 ∂3             n12 = ξ1 ∂2 − θ12 δ15 + θ23 δ35 + θ24 δ45
             n4 = δ15 + θ24 ∂3 − θ23 ∂4   − θ34 ∂2             n13 = x4 ∂3 − θ13 δ14 − θ23 δ24 − θ35 δ45
             n5 = δ24 + θ15 ∂3 − θ13 ∂5  − θ35 ∂1              n14 = ξ1 ∂3 − θ13 δ15 − θ23 δ25 + θ34 δ45
             n6 = δ25 + θ13 ∂4 + θ34 ∂1 − θ14 ∂3               n17 = ∂1
             n7 = δ34 + θ12 ∂5 + θ25 ∂1 − θ15 ∂2               n18 = ∂2
             n8 = δ35 + θ14 ∂2 − θ12 ∂4 − θ24 ∂1               n19 = ∂3
             n9 = x4 ∂1 + θ12 δ24 + θ13 δ34 − θ15 δ45          n20 = δ45 + θ12 ∂3 + θ23 ∂1 − θ13 ∂2


    n15 = − ξ1 θ12 ∂3 + ξ1 θ13 ∂2 − ξ1 θ23 ∂1 + 2 θ12 θ13 θ23 ∂4 − θ12 θ13 θ24 ∂3 +
    θ12 θ13 θ34 ∂2 − θ12 θ14 θ23 ∂3 − θ12 θ23 θ34 ∂1 + θ13 θ14 θ23 ∂2 + θ13 θ23 θ24 ∂1 − ξ1 δ45 +
    2 θ12 θ13 δ15 + 2 θ12 θ23 δ25 − θ12 θ34 δ45 + 2 θ13 θ23 δ35 + θ13 θ24 δ45 + θ14 θ23 δ45


    n16 = − x4 θ12 ∂3 + x4 θ13 ∂2 − x4 θ23 ∂1 + 2 θ12 θ13 δ14 + 2 θ12 θ23 δ24 + θ12 θ35 δ45 +
    2 θ13 θ23 δ34 − θ13 θ25 δ45 − θ15 θ23 δ45 − 2 θ12 θ13 θ23 ∂5 + θ12 θ13 θ25 ∂3 − θ12 θ13 θ35 ∂2 + θ12 θ15 θ23 ∂3 +
    θ12 θ23 θ35 ∂1 − θ13 θ15 θ23 ∂2 − θ13 θ23 θ25 ∂1 − x4 δ45
34 P. Grozman, D. Leites and I. Shchepochkina

    The mi are the following elements of the irreducible g0 -module V :
  m1 is the highest weight vector   m15 = y5 · m1                  m88 = y4 · y7 · m1
  m2 = y1 · m1                      m21 = y1 · y2 · y2 · m1        m91 = y1 · y1 · y1 · y1     · y1 · m1
  m3 = y2 · m1                      m22 = y1 · y2 · y3 · m1        m92 = y1 · y1 · y1 · y1     · y2 · m1
  m4 = y3 · m1                      m27 = y1 · y6 · m1             m93 = y1 · y1 · y1 · y1     · y3 · m1
  m5 = y4 · m1                      m31 = y2 · y3 · y4 · m1        m94 = y1 · y1 · y1 · y1     · y4 · m1
  m7 = y1 · y2 · m1                 m36 = y3 · y5 · m1             m95 = y1 · y1   · y1 · y2   · y2 · m1
  m9 = y1 · y4 · m1                 m39 = y4 · y5 · m1             m96 = y1 · y1   · y1 · y2   · y3 · m1
  m10 = y2 · y2 · m1                m41 = y7 · m1                  m97 = y1 · y1   · y1 · y2   · y4 · m1
  m11 = y2 · y3 · m1                m56 = y1 · y2 · y3 · y4 · m1   m98 = y1 · y1   · y1 · y3   · y4 · m1
  m12 = y2 · y4 · m1                m65 = y1 · y4 · y6 · m1        m99 = y1 · y1 · y1 · y4 · y4 · m1
  m13 = y3 · y4 · m1                m82 = y3 · y4 · y5 · m1        m100 = y1 · y1 · y1 · y5 · m1



Theorem In I(V ) in degree 1) (higher degrees were not considered), there
are only the following singular vectors:
1a) λ −→ λ + (0, 0, −2, 1): n16 ⊗ m1 for ANY λ;
1b) λ −→ λ + (0, 0, −1, −1): −λ4 n15 ⊗ m1 + n16 ⊗ m5 for ANY λ;
1c) (k, l, 1, 1) −→ (k, l + 1, 0, 0)

                 − n15 ⊗ m4 + 2 n14 ⊗ m1 + n16 ⊗ m13 − 2 n13 ⊗ m5

1d) (k, l, 2, 0) −→ (k, l + 1, 0, 1): n16 ⊗ m4 − 2 n13 ⊗ m1 ;
1e) (k, −1, 1, 1) −→ (k, 0, 1, 0)

− n15 ⊗ m11 − 2 n12 ⊗ m1 + 2 n14 ⊗ m3 + n16 ⊗ m31 + 2 n11 ⊗ m5 − 2 n13 ⊗ m12

1f) (−1, k, k + 2, 1) −→ (−2, k, k + 2, 0), where k 6= 0
         − n15 ⊗ (m22 − (1 + k) m27 ) − 2 k n10 ⊗ m1 + 2 k n12 ⊗ m2 + 2 n14 ⊗ m7
         +n16 ⊗ (m56 − (1 + k) m65 ) + 2 k n9 ⊗ m5 − 2 k n11 ⊗ m9 − 2 n13 ⊗ m23

1g) (k, 0, −k − 1, 1) −→ (k − 1, 0, −k − 1, 0), where k 6= 0, −1
         − n15 ⊗ (m22 − (k + 2) m27 − (k + 1) m36 − (k + 1)2 m41 )
         +2 k (k + 1) n10 ⊗ m1 + 2 (k + 1) n12 ⊗ m2
         +n14 ⊗ (−2(3 + 2 k) m7 − 2 (1 + k) m15 )
         +n16 ⊗ (m56 − (k + 2) m65 − (k + 1) m82 − (k + 1)2 m88 )
         −2 k (1 + k) n9 ⊗ m5 − 2 (1 + k) n11 ⊗ m9 + 2 (1 + k) n13 ⊗ (m23 + m39 )

1h) (k, −k − 2, 1, 1) −→ (k − 1, −k − 2, 1, 0), where k 6= 0
          − n15 ⊗ (m22 − (1 + k) m36 + (1 + k) m41 ) − 2 k n10 ⊗ m1 − 2 n12 ⊗ m2
          +2 n14 ⊗ (m7 − (1 + k) m15 ) + n16 ⊗ (m56 − (1 + k) m82 + (1 + k) m88 )
          +2 k n9 ⊗ m5 + 2 n11 ⊗ m9 − 2 n13 ⊗ (m23 − (1 + k) m39 )
                                                 Invariant operators and Standard Models          35

9   Singular vectors for g = ksle(11|9)
Here we realize the elements of g, as in Ref. 19, as divergence-free vector fields
and closed 2-forms with shifted parity. We consider the following negative
operators from g0 :
                               y1 = x2 ∂1         y2 = x4 ∂3      y3 = x5 ∂4
                               y4 = πdx1 dx2      y5 = −x5 ∂3


and the elements of Cartan subalgebra
                  h1 = x1 ∂1 − x2 ∂2                    h2 = − 1 (x1 ∂1 + x2 ∂2 ) + x3 ∂3 ,
                                                               2
                  h3 = − 1 (x1 ∂1 + x2 ∂2 ) + x4 ∂4 ,   h4 = − 1 (x1 ∂1 + x2 ∂2 ) + x5 ∂5
                         2                                     2


The mi are the following elements of the irreducible g0 -module V :
             m2 = y1 m1                m16 = y1 y2 y3 m1             m42 = (y2 )2 (y3 )2 m1
             m3 = y2 m1                m18 = y1 y5 m1                m45 = y2 y3 y5 m1
             m4 = y3 m1                m20 = (y2 )2 y3 m1            m49 = y3 y4 m1
             m6 = y1 y2 m1             m21 = y2 (y3 )2 m1            m50 = (y5 )2 m1
             m7 = y1 y3 m1             m22 = y2 y5 m1                m74 = y1 y3 y4 m1
             m8 = (y2 )2 m1            m24 = y3 y5 m1                m85 = y2 y3 y4 m1
             m9 = y2 y3 m1             m25 = y4 m1                   m89 = (y3 )2 y4 m1
             m10 = (y3 )2 m1           m34 = y1 (y2 )2 y3 m1         m126 = y1 y2 y3 y4 m1
             m11 = y5 m1               m36 = y1 y2 y5 m1             m146 = y2 (y3 )2 y4 m1
             m15 = y1 (y2 )2 m1        m39 = y1 y4 m1                m231 = (y2 )2 (y3 )2 y4 m1



Theorem         In I(V ) in degrees d), there are only the following singular vectors:
1a) (2k, −k, l, m) −→ (2k + 1, −k + 32 , l + 1/2, m + 21 ): x3 ∂2 m1 ;
1b) (2k, l, 1 − k, m) −→ (2k + 1, l + 12 , −k + 52 , m + 21 ):

                              (x3 ∂2 ) m3 + (1 − k − l)(x4 ∂2 ) m1 ;

1c) (2k, l, m, 2 − k) −→ (2k + 1, l + 21 , m + 21 , −k + 72 )
(x3 ∂2 ) (m11 + (−2 + k + m)m15 ) + (1 − k − l)(x4 ∂2 ) m4 + (−1 + k + l)(−2 + k + m)(x5 ∂2 ) m1

1d) (2k, 3 − k, 3 − k, 2 − k) −→ (2k + 1, 25 − k, 52 − k, 25 − k)
(πdx1 dx3 ) m11 − (πdx1 dx4 ) m4 + (πdx1 dx5 ) m1 ) − (x3 ∂2 ) m85 + (x4 ∂2 ) m49 ) − (x5 ∂2 ) m25

1e) (2k, k + 1, l, m) −→ (2k − 1, k + 52 , l + 21 , m + 21 ): 2k(x3 ∂1 ) m1 + (x3 ∂2 ) m2
1f) (2k, l, 2 + k, m) −→ (2k − 1, l + 12 , k + 27 , m + 12 )
 2k(x3 ∂1 ) m3 ) + (x3 ∂2 ) m6 + 2k(2 + k − l)(x4 ∂1 ) m1 + (2 + k − l)(x4 ∂2 ) m2

1g) (2k, l, m, 3 + k) −→ (2k − 1, l + 12 , m + 21 , k + 92 )
          (x3 ∂1 ) (2km9 − 2k(3 + k − m)m11 ) + (x3 ∂2 ) (m16 + (−3 − k + m)m18 )
          +2k(2 + k − l)(x4 ∂1 ) m4 + (2 + k − l)(x4 ∂2 ) m7
          +2k(2 + k − l)(3 + k − m)(x5 ∂1 ) m1 + (2 + k − l)(3 + k − m)(x5 ∂2 ) m2
36 P. Grozman, D. Leites and I. Shchepochkina


1h) (2k, 4 + k, 4 + k, 3 + k) −→ (2k − 1, 72 − k, 27 − k, 72 − k)
    (π dx1 dx3 ) m18 − (π dx1 dx4 ) m7 (π dx1 dx5 ) m2 − 2k(π dx2 dx3 ) m11 2k(π dx2 dx4 ) m4
    −2k(π dx2 dx5 ) m1 − 2k(x3 ∂1 ) m85 − (x3 ∂2 ) m126 + 2k(x4 ∂1 ) m49 + (x4 ∂2 ) m74 )
    −2k(x5 ∂1 ) m25 − (x5 ∂2 ) m39

2a) (2k, −k − 1, l, m) −→ (2k + 2, −k + 2, l + 1, m + 1): (x3 ∂2 )2 m1
2b) (2k, −k − 1, −k + 1, l) −→ (2k + 2, −k + 1, −k + 3, l + 1):

                               (x3 ∂2 )2 m3 + 2x3 ∂2 x4 ∂2 m1

2c) (2k, −k − 1, l, −k + 2) −→ (2k + 2, −k + 1, l + 1, −k + 4)
(x3 ∂2 )2 (m9 + (−2 + k + l)m11 ) + 2x3 ∂2 x4 ∂2 m4 − 2(−2 + k + l)x3 ∂2 x5 ∂2 m1

2d) (2k, l, −k, m) −→ (2k + 2, l + 1, −k + 3, m + 1)
   (x3 ∂2 )2 m8 + (−1 + k + l)(k + l)(x4 ∂2 )2 m1 − 2(−1 + k + l)x3 ∂2 x4 ∂2 m3

2e) (2k, l, −k, −k + 2) −→ (2k + 2, l + 1, −k + 2, −k + 4)
            (x3 ∂2 )2 (m20 − (2m22 )) + (−1 + k + l)(k + l)(x4 ∂2 )2 m4
            −2(−1 + k + l)x3 ∂2 x4 ∂2 (m9 − m11 ) − 2(−1 + k + l)x3 ∂2 x5 ∂2 m3
            +2(−1 + k + l)(k + l)x4 ∂2 x5 ∂2 m1

In particular, 2ea) l = 1 − k:

 (x3 ∂2 )2 m22 + (x4 ∂2 )2 m4 − x3 ∂2 x4 ∂2 m9 − 2x3 ∂2 x5 ∂2 m3 + 2x4 ∂2 x5 ∂2 m1

2f) (2k, l, m, −k + 1) −→ (2k + 2, l + 1, m + 1, −k + 4)
 (x3 ∂2 )2 (m42 + 2(−2 + k + m)m45 + (−2 + k + m)(−1 + k + m)m50 )
 +(−1 + k + l)(k + l)(x4 ∂2 )2 m10 + (−1 + k + l)(k + l)(−2 + k + m)(−1 + k + m)(x5 ∂2 )2 m1
 −2(−1 + k + l)x3 ∂2 x4 ∂2 (m21 + (−2 + k + m)m24 )
 +2(−1 + k + l)(−2 + k + m)x3 ∂2 x5 ∂2 (m9 + (−1 + k + m)m11 )−
 2(−1 + k + l)(k + l)(−2 + k + m)x4 ∂2 x5 ∂2 m4

In particular, 2fa) (2k, −k + 1, −k, −k + 1) −→ (2k + 2, −k + 2, −k + 1, −k + 4):
        (x3 ∂2 )2 (m42 − 4m50 ) + 2(x4 ∂2 )2 m10 + 4(x5 ∂2 )2 m1
        +4x3 ∂2 x4 ∂2 (−m21 + 2m24 ) + 8x3 ∂2 x5 ∂2 ) (−m9 + m11 ) + 8x4 ∂2 x5 ∂2 m4

2fb) (2k, −k, −k, −k + 1) −→ (2k + 2, −k + 1, −k + 1, −k + 4):
(x3 ∂2 )2 m45 + (x4 ∂2 )2 m10 + 2(x5 ∂2 )2 m1 − x3 ∂2 x4 ∂2 m21 − 4x3 ∂2 x5 ∂2 m9 + 4x4 ∂2 x5 ∂2 m4
                                          Invariant operators and Standard Models         37


2g) (2k, 3 − k, 3 − k, 1 − k) −→ (2k + 2, 3 − k, 3 − k, 3 − k)
       (x3 ∂2 )2 m231 + 2(x4 ∂2 )2 m89 + 4(x5 ∂2 )2 m25
       −4πdx1 dx3 x3 ∂2 m45 + 4πdx1 dx3 x4 ∂2 m24 − 4πdx1 dx3 x5 ∂2 m11
       +4πdx1 dx4 x3 ∂2 (m21 − m24 ) − 4πdx1 dx4 x4 ∂2 m10 + 4πdx1 dx4 x5 ∂2 m4
       +4πdx1 dx5 x3 ∂2 (−3m9 + 2m11 ) + 4πdx1 dx5 x4 ∂2 m4 − 8πdx1 dx5 x5 ∂2 m1
       −2x3 ∂2 x4 ∂2 m146 + 4x3 ∂2 x5 ∂2 m85
       −4x4 ∂2 x5 ∂2 m49

2h) (−2, 0, k, l) −→ (−2, 3, k + 1, l + 1): (x3 ∂2 )2 m2 − 2x3 ∂1 x3 ∂2 m1
2i) (2k, −k, l, m) −→ (2k, −k + 2, l + 2, m + 1)
     (x3 ∂2 )2 m6 + 2kx3 ∂1 x3 ∂2 m3 + 4k(1 + k)x3 ∂2 x4 ∂1 m1 + 2(1 + k)x3 ∂2 x4 ∂2 m2

2j) (2k, k + 1, l, m) −→ (2k, k + 3, l + 2, m + 1)
  (x3 ∂2 )2 m6 + 2kx3 ∂1 x3 ∂2 m3 − 2k(1 + 2k)x3 ∂1 x4 ∂2 m1
  +2kx3 ∂2 x4 ∂1 m1 − 2kx3 ∂2 x4 ∂2 m2 − 2(−1 + k + l)(k + l)(−2 + k + m)x4 ∂2 x5 ∂2 m4

In particular, 2ja) (0, 1, 1, m) −→ (0, 3, 3, m + 1):

                            −x3 ∂1 x4 ∂2 m1 + x3 ∂2 x4 ∂1 m1

2k) (2k, −k, l, k + 3) −→ (2k, −k + 2, l + 1, k + 4)
          (x3 ∂2 )2 (m16 + (−3 − k + l)m18 ) + 2kx3 ∂1 x3 ∂2 (m9 − (3 + k − l)m11 )
          +4k(1 + k)x3 ∂2 x4 ∂1 m4 + 2(1 + k)x3 ∂2 x4 ∂2 m7
          +4k(1 + k)(3 + k − l)x3 ∂2 x5 ∂1 m1 + 2(1 + k)(3 + k − l)x3 ∂2 x5 ∂2 m2

2l) (2k, k + 1, l, 2 − k) −→ (2k, k + 3, l + 1, 4 − k)
         (x3 ∂2 )2 (m16 + (−2 + k + l)m18 ) + 2kx3 ∂1 x3 ∂2 (m9 + (−2 + k + l)m11 )
         −2k(1 + 2k)x3 ∂1 x4 ∂2 m4 + 2k(1 + 2k)(−2 + k + l)x3 ∂1 x5 ∂2 m1
         +2kx3 ∂2 x4 ∂1 m4 − 2kx3 ∂2 x4 ∂2 m7
         −2k(−2 + k + l)x3 ∂2 x5 ∂1 m1 + 2k(−2 + k + l)x3 ∂2 x5 ∂2 m2

In particular, 2la) (0, 1, l, 2) −→ (0, 3, l + 1, 4):

  x3 ∂1 x4 ∂2 m4 − (l − 2)x3 ∂1 x5 ∂2 m1 − x3 ∂2 x4 ∂1 m4 + (l − 2)x3 ∂2 x5 ∂1 m1

2m) (−2, k, 1, l) −→ (−2, k + 1, 4, l + 1)
  (x3 ∂2 )2 m15 + (−2 + k)(−1 + k)(x4 ∂2 )2 m2 − 2x3 ∂1 x3 ∂2 m8 + 2(−2 + k)x3 ∂1 x4 ∂2 m3
  +2(−2 + k)x3 ∂2 x4 ∂1 m3 − 2(−2 + k)x3 ∂2 x4 ∂2 m6 − 2(−2 + k)(−1 + k)x4 ∂1 x4 ∂2 m1
38 P. Grozman, D. Leites and I. Shchepochkina


2n) (2k, l, −k + 1, k + 3) −→ (2k, l + 1, −k + 3, k + 5)
 (x3 ∂2 )2 (m34 − 2(1 + k)m36 ) − (2 + k − l)(−1 + k + l)(x4 ∂2 )2 m7 +
 2kx3 ∂1 x3 ∂2 (m20 − 2(1 + k)m22 ) + 2k(−1 + k + l)x3 ∂1 x4 ∂2 (−m9
 +2(1 + k)m11 ) + 2kx3 ∂2 x4 ∂1 ((3 + k − l)m9 − 2(1 + k)m11 )+
 2x3 ∂2 x4 ∂2 (−(−2 + l)m16 + (1 + k)(−2 + k + l)m18 ) + 4k(1 + k)(2 + k − l)x3 ∂2 x5 ∂1 m3
 +2(1 + k)(2 + k − l)x3 ∂2 x5 ∂2 m6 − 2k(2 + k − l)(−1 + k + l)x4 ∂1 x4 ∂2 m4 −
 4k(1 + k)(2 + k − l)(−1 + k + l)x4 ∂2 x5 ∂1 m1 − 2(1 + k)(2 + k − l)(−1 + k + l)x4 ∂2 x5 ∂2 m2

2o) (2k, l, k + 2, −k + 2) −→ (2k, l + 1, k + 4, −k + 4)
 (x3 ∂2 )2 (m34 + (2k)m36 ) − (2 + k − l)(−1 + k + l)(x4 ∂2 )2 m7 + 2kx3 ∂1 x3 ∂2 (m20 + 2km22 )
 +2k(−1 + k + l)x3 ∂1 x4 ∂2 (−m9 + m11 ) + 2k(1 + 2k)(−1 + k + l)x3 ∂1 x5 ∂2 m3
 +2kx3 ∂2 x4 ∂1 ((3 + k − l)m9 + (1 + 5k + 2k 2 − l − 2kl)m11 )
 +2x3 ∂2 x4 ∂2 (−(−2 + l)m16 + k(3 + k − l)m18 ) − 2k(−1 + k + l)x3 ∂2 x5 ∂1 m3
 +2k(−1 + k + l)x3 ∂2 x5 ∂2 m6 − 2k(2 + k − l)(−1 + k + l)x4 ∂1 x4 ∂2 m4
 +2k(1 + 2k)(2 + k − l)(−1 + k + l)x4 ∂1 x5 ∂2 m1 − 2k(2 + k − l)(−1 + k + l)x4 ∂2 x5 ∂1 m1
 +2k(2 + k − l)(−1 + k + l)x4 ∂2 x5 ∂2 m2


10    Singular vectors for g = kas and g = k(1|n)
The coordinates of the weights are given with respect to the following basis of
g0 :
                                                             n
                       (Kt , Kξ1 η1 , . . . , Kξs ηs ), s = [ ].
                                                             2
Theorem In I(V ), there are only the following singular for k(1|3) vectors:
1a) (k, −k) −→ (k − 1, −k + 1): ξ1 ⊗ m1 ;
1a∗ ) (k + 1, k) −→ (k, k − 1)
                      
                   2
      ξ1 ⊗ (η1 θ1 ) ·m1 − k (−1 + 2 k) η1 ⊗ m1 + (1 − 2 k) θ1 ⊗ (η1 θ1 ·m1 )

1b) (1, −1) −→ (0, −1): ξ1 ⊗ (η1 θ1 ·m1 ) + θ1 ⊗ m1 ;
2a) 21 (3, 1) −→ 12 (−1, 1)

                  I ⊗ m1 − 2 (ξ1 ·θ1 ) ⊗ (η1 θ1 ·m1 ) + (η1 ·ξ1 ) ⊗ m1

Theorem In I(V ), there are only the following singular for k(1|4) vectors:
1a) (k, −k, 0) −→ (k − 1, −k + 1, 0): ξ1 ⊗ m1 ;
1a∗ ) (k + 1, −1, k) −→ (k, −1, k − 1), where k 6= 1
                           ξ1 ⊗ (η1 η2 ·m1 ) + (1 − k) η2 ⊗ m1
                                              Invariant operators and Standard Models    39

1b) (k, −1, 1 − k) −→ (k − 1, −1, 2 − k), where k 6= 2
                           (−2 + k) ξ2 ⊗ m1 + ξ1 ⊗ (ξ2 η1 ·m1 )

1c) (k + 2, k, 0) −→ (k + 1, k − 1, 0), where k 6= 0
                                ξ1 ⊗ (η1 η2 ·m1 ) − k η2 ⊗ m1

2a) (1, −1, −1) −→ (−1, 0, 0): (ξ2 ·ξ1 ) ⊗ m1 ;
2b) (2, −1, 1) −→ (0, 0, 0): (η2 ·ξ1 ) ⊗ m1 ;
2c) (2, −1, −1) −→ (0, −1, −1)
            I ⊗ m1 − (ξ2 ·ξ1 ) ⊗ (η1 η2 ·m1 ) + (η1 ·ξ1 ) ⊗ m1 + (η2 ·ξ2 ) ⊗ m1

Theorem In I(V ), there are only the following singular for k(1|6) and kas
vectors:
1a) λ = (k, −k, l, l) −→ λ + (−1, 1, 0, 0); kas and k(1|6): ξ1 ⊗ m1 (for k(1|6)
only if l = 0; for kas without restrictions);
1a∗ ) λ = (k, l, 1 − k, l + 1) −→ λ + (−1, 0, 1, 0)

                  kas :        (−1 + k + l) ξ2 ⊗ m1 + ξ1 ⊗ (ξ2 η1 ·m1 )
                  k(1|6) :      the above for l = −1

1b) λ = (k, l, l, 2 − k) −→ λ + (−1, 0, 0, 1), where l + k 6= 2

    kas :       ξ1 ⊗ (ξ2 η1 ·ξ3 η2 ·m1 ) + ξ2 ⊗ (ξ3 η2 ·m1 ) + (−2 + k + l) ξ3 ⊗ m1
    k(1|6) :     the above for l = −1

1c) λ = (k, l, −l − 2, k − 2) −→ λ + (−1, 0, 0, −1), where l + k 6= 1 and k − l 6= 4

 kas :       ξ1 ⊗ (ξ2 η1 ·η2 η3 ·m1 ) + (−4 + k − l) ξ1 ⊗ (η1 η3 ·m1 )
             +(−1 + k + l) ξ2 ⊗ (η2 η3 ·m1 ) − (−4 + k − l) (−1 + k + l) η3 ⊗ m1
 k(1|6) :      the above for l = −1
    The singular vectors of degree 2 for kas and k(1|6) are the same:
2a) (3, −1, −1, −1) −→ (1, −1, −1, −1)
                −2 I ⊗ m1 + (ξ2 ·ξ1 ) ⊗ (ξ3 η2 ·η1 η3 ·m1 ) + (ξ3 ·ξ1 ) ⊗ (η1 η3 ·m1 )
                + (ξ3 ·ξ2 ) ⊗ (η2 η3 ·m1 ) − (η1 ·ξ1 ) ⊗ m1 − (η2 ·ξ1 ) ⊗ (ξ2 η1 ·m1 )
                − (η2 ·ξ2 ) ⊗ m1 + (η3 ·ξ1 ) ⊗ (ξ2 η1 ·ξ3 η2 ·m1 )
                − (η3 ·ξ1 ) ⊗ (ξ3 η1 ·m1 ) − (η3 ·ξ3 ) ⊗ m1
40 P. Grozman, D. Leites and I. Shchepochkina

2a∗ ) (3, −1, 0, 0) −→ (1, −1, 0, 0)
         − I ⊗ m1 + (ξ2 ·ξ1 ) ⊗ (ξ3 η2 ·η1 η3 ·m1 ) + (ξ3 ·ξ1 ) ⊗ (η1 η3 ·m1 )
         + (ξ3 ·ξ2 ) ⊗ (η2 η3 ·m1 ) − (η1 ·ξ1 ) ⊗ m1 − (η2 ·ξ1 ) ⊗ (ξ2 η1 ·m1 )
         + (η3 ·ξ1 ) ⊗ (ξ2 η1 ·ξ3 η2 ·m1 ) − (η3 ·ξ1 ) ⊗ (ξ3 η1 ·m1 ) − (η3 ·ξ2 ) ⊗ (ξ3 η2 ·m1 )

2b) (3, −1, −1, 1) −→ (1, −1, −1, 1)
             − I ⊗ m1 + (ξ2 ·ξ1 ) ⊗ (η2 η3 ·ξ3 η1 ·m1 ) − (ξ3 ·ξ1 ) ⊗ (ξ2 η1 ·η2 η3 ·m1 )
             + (ξ3 ·ξ1 ) ⊗ (η1 η3 ·m1 ) − (η1 ·ξ1 ) ⊗ m1 − (η2 ·ξ1 ) ⊗ (ξ2 η1 ·m1 )
             − (η2 ·ξ2 ) ⊗ m1 − (η3 ·ξ1 ) ⊗ (ξ3 η1 ·m1 )
             − (η3 ·ξ2 ) ⊗ (ξ3 η2 ·m1 ) + (η3 ·ξ3 ) ⊗ m1


11    Singular vectors for g = kas(1|6; 3ξ)
Set
                    m1 is the highest weight vector      m15 = ξ1 η2 (ξ3 η1 )2 m1
                    m2 = ξ 1 η 2 m1                      m16 = ξ1 η2 ξ3 η1 η3 m1
                    m3 = ξ 3 η 1 m1                      m18 = ξ1 η2 η1 m1
                    m4 = η 3 m1                          m23 = η3 ξ3 η2 m1
                    m6 = ξ 1 η 2 ξ 3 η 1 m1              m25 = −(η2 m1 )
                    m7 = ξ 1 η 2 η 3 m1                  m34 = ξ1 η2 (ξ3 η1 )2 η3 m1
                    m9 = ξ 3 η 1 η 3 m1                  m36 = ξ1 η2 ξ3 η1 η1 m1
                    m10 = ξ3 η2 m1                       m46 = −(ξ3 η1 η2 m1 )
                    m11 = η1 m1                          m49 = ξ3 η2 η1 m1


Theorem In I(V ) in degrees d), there are only the following singular vectors:
1a) λ −→ λ + (1, 1, 1, 1) for ANY λ: ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 m1 ;
1b) (k, l − 1, −l − 1, k) −→ (k, l, −l, k): ξ1 ξ2 m1 + ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 m4 ;
1c) (k, l, k − 1, −l − 1) −→ (k, l, k, −l), where k + l 6= 0
             ξ1 ξ2 m3 − (k + l)ξ2 ξ3 m1 + ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 (m9 − (k + l + 1)m11 )
1d) (k + 1, k − 1, l, −l) −→ (k + 1, k − 1, l + 1, −l + 1), where k + l 6= 0, k 6= l + 1
      ξ1 ξ2 (m6 + (−k + l)m10 ) − (−1+k−l)(k+l)ξ1 ξ3 m1
      −(k+l)ξ2 ξ3 m2 + ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 (m16 − (k+l+1)m18 + (−k+l)m23 − (k−l)(k+l)m25 )
1e) (k + 1, k − 1, 0, 0) −→ (k + 1, k − 1, 1, 1), where k 6= 1 (new for k = 0 only)
                           ξ1 ξ2 (m6 − 2m10 ) + 2(1 − k)ξ1 ξ3 m1
                           −2ξ2 ξ3 m2 − 2ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 (m18 + m23 + km25 )

2a) λ −→ λ + (1, 2, 2, 1), where λ4 = −2 − λ3 : ξ1 ξ2 · ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 m1 ;
2b) λ −→ λ + (1, 2, 1, 2), where λ4 = −1 − λ2 , λ2 + λ3 6= −1
            ξ1 ξ2 · ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 m3 + (−1 − λ2 − λ3 )(ξ2 ξ3 · ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 m1 )
2c) λ −→ λ + (1, 1, 2, 2), where λ4 = −λ3 , λ2 6= λ3 , λ2 + λ3 6= −1
           (ξ1 ξ2 · ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 ) (m6 + (−1 − λ2 + λ3 )m10 ) − (λ2 − λ3 )(1 + λ2 + λ3 )
           ×(ξ1 ξ3 · ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 ) m1 + (−1 − λ2 − λ3 )(ξ2 ξ3 · ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 ) m2
                                                 Invariant operators and Standard Models          41

2d) (k, l, 0, 0) −→ (k + 1, l + 1, 2, 2), where l 6= 0 (new for l = −1 only)
             (ξ1 ξ2 · ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 ) m10 + l(ξ1 ξ3 · ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 ) m1 + (ξ2 ξ3 · ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 ) m2

2e) (k, −k, k − 3, k − 1) −→ (k, −k + 2, k − 2, k)
(ξ1 ξ2 )2 m3 −2ξ2 ·ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 m1 +2ξ1 ξ2 ·ξ2 ξ3 m1 +ξ1 ξ2 ·ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 (m9 −m11 )+2ξ2 ξ3 ·ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 m4

2f) (k, −k, l, l) −→ (k, −k + 2, l + 1, l + 1), where k 6= l

  (ξ1 ξ2 )2 m3 − 4(k − l)ξ2 · ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 m1 − 4ξ1 ξ2 · ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 m11 + 4ξ2 ξ3 · ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 m4

2g) (1 + k, l, −k, 1 + l) −→ (1 + k, l + 1, 2 − k, 2 + l)
      (k − l)(1 + k − l)(k + l)ξ1 · ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 m1 + (k − l)(1 + k − l)ξ2 · ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 m2
      +ξ1 ξ2 · ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 (m16 + (k − l)m18 + (−1 − k − l)m23 + (1 + k − l)(1 + k + l)m25 )
      −(1 + k − l)(k + l)ξ1 ξ3 · ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 m4 + (−1 − k + l)ξ2 ξ3 · ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 m7

2h) (k + 2, k − 2, k, −k) −→ (k + 2, k − 1, k + 1, −k + 2)
     (ξ1 ξ2 )2 m15 + 2k(−1 + 2k)(ξ2 ξ3 )2 m2 − 2(−1 + 2k)ξ1 · ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 m3
     −2ξ2 · ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 (m6 + 2km10 ) − 4k(−1 + 2k)ξ3 · ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 m1 + 2(−1 + 2k)ξ1 ξ2 · ξ1 ξ3 m3
     −2(−1 + 2k)ξ1 ξ2 · ξ2 ξ3 m6 + ξ1 ξ2 · ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 (m34 − 2(1 + k)m36 − 2km46 − 2km49 )
     −4k(−1 + 2k)ξ1 ξ3 · ξ2 ξ3 m1 + 2(−1 + 2k)ξ1 ξ3 · ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 (m9 − (1 + 2k)m11 )
     +2ξ2 ξ3 · ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 (−(−1 + k)m16 + (−1 + 2k 2 )m18 + km23 + 2(−1 + 2k)m25 )

2i) (−l + 1, k, k, l + 1) −→ (−l + 2, k + 2, k + 2, l + 2)
       (k − l)(ξ2 ξ3 )2 m2 − 2(k + l)ξ1 · ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 m3 + 2ξ2 · ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 (−m6 + (1 − k − l)m10 )
       −2(−1 + k − l)(k + l)ξ3 · ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 m1 + 2ξ1 ξ2 · ξ2 ξ3 (−m6 + m10 )
       +2ξ1 ξ2 · ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 (m46 + m49 ) + 2ξ1 ξ3 · ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 (−m9 + (k − l)m11 )
       +2ξ2 ξ3 · ξ1 ξ2 ξ3 (m18 − m23 + (2 − k + l)m25 )


12     Singular vectors for g = kas(1|6; 3η)
The mi are the following elements of the irreducible g0 -module V :

                                     m11 = ξ3 η2 m1
           m2 = ξ 2 m1                                             m30 = ξ2 ξ1 η2 ξ3 η2 m1
                                     m13 = ξ2 ξ1 η2 ξ3 η1 m1
           m3 = ξ 1 η 2 m1                                         m34 = −(ξ2 ξ3 m1 )
                                     m16 = ξ2 ξ3 η2 m1
           m4 = ξ 3 η 1 m1                                         m37 = (ξ1 η2 )2 (ξ3 η1 )2 m1
                                     m18 = (ξ1 η2 )2 ξ3 η1 m1
           m5 = ξ 2 ξ 1 η 2 m1                                     m41 = ξ1 η2 ξ3 η1 ξ1 m1
                                     m19 = ξ1 η2 (ξ3 η1 )2 m1
           m6 = ξ 2 ξ 3 η 1 m1                                     m42 = ξ1 η2 ξ3 η1 ξ3 η2 m1
                                     m21 = ξ1 η2 ξ3 η2 m1
           m7 = (ξ1 η2 )2 m1                                       m43 = −(ξ1 η2 ξ3 m1 )
                                     m23 = ξ3 η1 ξ1 m1
           m8 = ξ 1 η 2 ξ 3 η 1 m1                                 m48 = ξ1 ξ3 η2 m1
                                     m24 = ξ3 η1 ξ3 η2 m1
           m9 = (ξ3 η1 )2 m1                                       m49 = (ξ3 η2 )2 m1
                                     m25 = −(ξ3 m1 )
           m10 = ξ1 m1                                             m86 = −(ξ1 ξ3 m1 )
                                     m27 = ξ2 (ξ1 η2 )2 ξ3 η1 m1
42 P. Grozman, D. Leites and I. Shchepochkina

Theorem In I(V ) in degrees d), there are only the following singular vectors:
1a) (k, l, m, −m) −→ (l, l, m − 1, −m − 1): η1 η3 m1 ;
1b) (k, l, m, −l − 1) −→ (k, l − 1, m, −l − 2): η1 η3 m3 + (−l + m)η2 η3 m1 ;
1c) (k, l, −l − 2, m) −→ (k, l − 1, −l − 3, m)
(1+l−m)(2+l+m)η1η2 m1 +η1 η3 (m8 +(−2−l−m)m11)+(−1−l+m)η2η3 m4

1d) (k + 3, −k − 2, k, k − 1) −→ (k + 2, −k − 2, k − 1, k − 1)
       2kη1 m1 − 2kη3 m4 + 2kη1 η2 m2 + η1 η3 (m13 + m16 ) + 2kη2 η3 m6

1e) (k + 3, k − 1, −k − 1, k − 1) −→ (k + 2, k − 2, −k − 1, k − 1)
       2kη1 m3 − 4k 2 η2 m1 + 2kη3 (−m8 + (1 + 2k)m11 )
       +2kη1 η2 (m5 + 2km10 ) + η1 η3 (m27 − 2km30 + 2km41 − 2km43 − 4k 2 m48 )
       +2kη2 η3 (−m16 − m23 + m25 )

1f) (4, 0, −1, −1) −→ (3, −1, −1, −1)
                −2η1 m3 ) + 2η2 m1 + η3 (m8 − 2m11 ) − η1 η2 (m5 + m10 )
                +η1 η3 (m27 + m43 + m48 ) − η2 η3 (2m13 − m16 + m23 )

1g) (4, 0, 0, 0) −→ (2, 0, 0, 0)
6 m1 +η1 (m5 +3m10 )+3η2 m2 −η3 (m16 +m23 )+η1 η2 m15 +η1 η3 m86 +η2 η3 m34

2a) (k, l, m, 2 − m) −→ (k, l, m − 2, −m): (η1 η3 )2 m1 ;
2b) (k, l, l + 2, −l − 1) −→ (0, l − 1, l + 1, −l − 3)
                             (η1 η3 )2 m3 + 2η1 η3 · η2 η3 m1

2c) (k, l − 2, −l, l + 1) −→ (k, l − 3, −l − 2, l), where l 6= − 21

    (η1 η3 )2 (m8 − (1 + 2l)m11 ) − 2(1 + 2l)η1 η2 · η1 η3 m1 + 2η1 η3 · η2 η3 m4

2d) (k, l, m, −l) −→ (k, l − 2, m, −l − 2)

 (η1 η3 )2 m7 + (−1 + l − m)(l − m)(η2 η3 )2 m1 − 2(−1 + l − m)η1 η3 · η2 η3 m3

2e) (k, l − 1, −l − 1, −l + 1) −→ (k, l − 3, −1 − 2, −l)
        (η1 η3 )2 (m18 − 2m21 ) + 2l(−1 + 2l)(η2 η3 )2 m4 + 2(−1 + 2l)η1 η2 · η1 η3 m3
        −4l(−1 + 2l)η1 η2 · η2 η3 m1 + 2(−1 + 2l)η1 η3 · η2 η3 (−2m8 + m11 )

2ea) Particular solution for l = 12 :

(η1 η3 )2 m21 + (η2 η3 )2 m4 + 2η1 η2 · η1 η3 m3 − 2η1 η2 · η2 η3 m1 − η1 η3 · η2 η3 m8
                                               Invariant operators and Standard Models         43

2f) (k, l, −l − 1, m) −→ (k, l − 2, −l − 3, m), where m 6= l, l + 1, −l − 1, −l − 2
              (l − m)(1 + l − m)(1 + l + m)(2 + l + m)(η1 η2 )2 m1
              +(η1 η3 )2 (m37 − 2(2 + l + m)m42 + (1 + l + m)(2 + l + m)m49 )
              +(l − m)(1 + l − m)(η2 η3 )2 m9
              +2(l − m)(2 + l + m)η1 η2 · η1 η3 (m8 − (1 + l + m)m11 )
              −2(l − m)(1 + l − m)(2 + l + m)η1 η2 · η2 η3 m4
              +2(l − m)η1 η3 · η2 η3 (−m19 + (2 + l + m)m24 )

2fa) Particular solution for l = m = 0:
        4(η1 η2 )2 m1 + (η1 η3 )2 (m37 − 4m49 ) + 2(η2 η3 )2 m9
        +8η1 η2 · η1 η3 (m8 − m11 ) − 8η1 η2 · η2 η3 m4 + 4η1 η3 · η2 η3 (−m19 + 2m24 )

2fb) Particular solution for l = − 21 , m = 21 :
                 2(η1 η2 )2 m1 + (η1 η3 )2 m42 + (η2 η3 )2 m9 + 4η1 η2 · η1 η3 m8
                 −4η1 η2 · η2 η3 m4 − η1 η3 · η2 η3 m19

2g) (4, −3, 1, 0) −→ (3, −3, −1, −1)
 (η1 η3 )2 (m13 + m16 ) + 2η1 · η1 η3 m1 − 2η3 · η1 η3 m4 + 2η1 η2 · η1 η3 m2 + 2η1 η3 · η2 η3 m6

13    Singular vectors for g = vas(4|4)
We consider the following negative operators from g0 :
                       a5 = x2 δ3 + x3 δ2          a14 = −x4 ∂1 + ξ1 δ4
                       a6 = x3 δ3                  a15 = −2x3 δ4 − ξ1 ∂2 + ξ2 ∂1
                       a8 = x2 δ4 + x4 δ2          a18 = −x3 ∂2 + ξ2 δ3
                       a9 = x3 δ4 + x4 δ3          a19 = −x4 ∂2 + ξ2 δ4
                       a10 = x4 δ4                 a20 = 2x2 δ4 − ξ1 ∂3 + ξ3 ∂1
                       a12 = −x2 ∂1 + ξ1 δ2        a25 = −x4 ∂3 + ξ3 δ4
                       a13 = −x3 ∂1 + ξ1 δ3        a26 = −2x2 δ3 − ξ1 ∂4 + ξ4 ∂1


For the basis of Cartan subalgebra we take
                         a11 = − 1 x1 ∂1 + 1 x2 ∂2 + 1 x3 ∂3 + 1 x4 ∂4 + ξ1 δ1 )
                                 2          2         2         2
                         a17 = 1 x1 ∂1 − 1 x2 ∂2 + 1 x3 ∂3 + 1 x4 ∂4 + ξ2 δ2
                               2          2         2         2
                         a24 = 1 x ∂ +   1          1      1
                                            x ∂ − x3 ∂3 x4 ∂4 + ξ3 δ3
                               2 1 1     2 2 2      2      2
                         a32 = 1 x1 ∂1 + 1 x2 ∂2 + 1 x3 ∂3 − 1 x4 ∂4 + ξ4 δ4 )
                               2         2         2          2


The mi are the following elements of the irreducible g0 -module V :
                      m1 is the highest weight vector
                                                            m10 = a8 · m1
                      m2 = a5 · m1
                                                            m11 = a20 · m1
                      m3 = a25 · m1
                                                            m24 = a26 · a20 · m1
                      m4 = a26 · m1
                                                            m27 = − a12 · m1
                      m8 = a25 · a26 · m1


Theorem In I(V ), there are only the following singular vectors:
1a) (k, l, l, l) −→ (k + 1, l, l, l): δ1 ⊗ m1 ;
1b) (−1, 0, 0, 0) −→ 12 (−1, 1, 1, −1): ∂4 m1 + δ1 m4
44 P. Grozman, D. Leites and I. Shchepochkina

1c) 21 (−1, 1, 1, −1) −→ (0, 1, 0, 0):         ∂3 m1 − ∂4 m3 + δ1 m11
1d) (l, k + l, l, l) −→ (l, k + l + 1, l, l); two particular cases:
1da) l 6= 0 =⇒ k 6= −1:
−∂3 (4 l m2 + m4 ) − ∂4 (− m8 + 4 l m10 ) + δ1 (m24 − 4 l m27 ) − 4 (1 + k) l δ2 m1
1db) l = 0 =⇒ k 6= 0:         ∂3 m2 + ∂4 m10 + δ1 m27 + k δ2 m1

Acknowledgments
We are thankful for partial financial support: P.G. to TBSS, I.Shch. to RFBR
grants 99-01-00245 and 01-01-00490a; D.L.: to NFR. D.L. is also thankful to
Bernstein, Kirillov and Rudakov for teaching and kindness in times of need.
Larsson’s conjectures and generous discussion of unpublished results30 were
helpful to us.
PS. After the deadline for submission to the Marinov Memorial Volume there
appeared a preprint21 with some singular vectors for mb(3|8) and mb(5|10)
(finite dimensional fibers). We use the opportunity to add the reference; com-
parison will be done elsewhere.

References
   1. Alekseevsky D., Leites D., and Shchepochkina I., “New examples of sim-
      ple Lie superalgebras of vector fields,” C. R. Acad. Bulg. Sci. 34, no. 9,
      1187–1190 (1980).
   2. Bernstein J.N., “Two papers for pedestrians on representations of Lie
      algebras and Lie superalgebras,” In: Ref. 33, 9/1987-13, 60pp.
   3. Bernstein J.N. and Leites D.A., “Integral forms and the Stokes formula
      on supermanifolds,” Funktsional. Anal. i Prilozhen. 11, no. 1, 55–56
      (1977), (Russian) [English translation: Funct. Anal. Appl. 11, no. 1,
      45–47 (1977)].
   4. Bernstein J.N. and Leites D.A., “Integration of differential forms on
      supermanifolds,” Funktsional. Anal. i Prilozhen. 11, no. 3, 70–71 (1977)
      [English translation: Funct. Anal. Appl. 11, 219–221 (1977)].
   5. Bernstein J.N. and Leites D.A., “Invariant differential operators and ir-
      reducible representations of Lie superalgebras of vector fields,” Selected
      translations. Selecta Math. Soviet. 1, no. 2, 143–160 (1981).
   6. Bernstein J.N. and Leites D.A., “Irreducible representations of finite-
      dimensional Lie superalgebras of series W and S,” C. R. Acad. Bulgare
      Sci. 32, no. 3, 277–278 (1979);
      Leites D.A., “Invariant differential operators and irreducible representa-
      tions of Lie superalgebras of divergence-free vector fields,” Serdica, 8,
      no. 1, 12–15 (1982), (Russian).
                                  Invariant operators and Standard Models   45

 7. Cheng S. and Kac V., “Structure of some Z-graded Lie superalgebras of
    vector fields,” Transformation groups, 4, 219–272 (1999).
 8. Deligne P. et al (eds.), Quantum fields and strings: a course for mathe-
    maticians, Vols. 1, 2, Material from the Special Year on Quantum Field
    Theory held at the Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, NJ, 1996–
    1997 (AMS, Providence, RI; Institute for Advanced Study (IAS), Prince-
    ton, NJ, 1999).
 9. Feigin B.L. and Fuchs D.B., “Invariant differential operators on the line,”
    Funktsional. Anal. i Prilozhen. 13, no. 4, 91–92 (1979) [English transla-
    tion: Funct. Anal. Appl. 13, no. 4, 314–315 (1980))];
    id., “Cohomology of Lie groups and Lie algebras,” In: Current prob-
    lems in mathematics. Fundamental directions, 21, 121–209 (1988), Itogi
    Nauki i Tekhniki, Akad. Nauk SSSR, Vsesoyuz. Inst. Nauchn. i Tekhn.
    Inform., Moscow, (Russian).
10. Gomis J., Paris J. and Samuel S., “Antibracket, antifields and gauge-
    theory quantization,” Phys. Rept. 259, n.1–2, 1–191 (1995).
11. Grozman P., “Classification of bilinear invariant differential operators on
    tensor fields,” Funct. Anal. Appl. 14, no. 2, 58–59 (1980). ESI-preprint
    1114 (2001) [www.esi.ac.at]
12. Grozman P., “The local invariant bilinear operators on tensor fields on
    the plane,” Vestnik MGU, no. 6, 3–6 (1980).
13. Grozman P., “On bilinear invariant differential operators acting on tensor
    fields on a symplectic manifold,” J. Nonlinear Math. Phys. 8, no. 1, 31–37
    (2001).
14. Grozman P. and Leites D., “Mathematica-aided study of Lie algebras
    and their cohomology. From supergravity to ballbearings and magnetic
    hydrodynamics,” In: The second International Mathematica symposium,
    June 1997, eds. Keränen V. et al, Rovaniemi, 185–192.
15. Grozman P. and Leites D., “ From supergravity to ballbearings,” In:
    Supersymmetries and quantum symmetries (Proceedings of SQS’97, 22–
    26 July, 1997), eds. Wess J. and Ivanov E. (Berlin, Germany, Springer-
    Verlag, 1999), Lecture Notes in Physics, Vol. 524. pp. 58–67.
16. Grozman P., Leites D. and Shchepochkina I., “Lie superalgebras of string
    theories,” Acta Mathematica Vietnamica, 26, no. 1, 27–63 (2001) [hep-th
    9702120].
17. Kac V., Classification of infinite-dimensional simple linearly compact Lie
    superalgebras, ESI-preprint 605 (1997), [www.esi.ac.at].
18. Kac V., “Classification of infinite-dimensional simple groups of supersym-
    metries and quantum field theory”, GAFA 2000 (Tel Aviv, 1999). Geom.
    Funct. Anal. Special Volume, Part I, 162–183 (2000) [math.QA/9912235].
46 P. Grozman, D. Leites and I. Shchepochkina

 19. Kac V. and Rudakov A., Representations of the exceptional Lie su-
     peralgebra E(3, 6): I. Degeneracy conditions, ESI-preprint 921 (2000)
     [www.esi.ac.at, math-ph/0012049].
 20. Kac V. and Rudakov A., Representations of the exceptional Lie super-
     algebra E(3, 6): II. Four series of degenerate modules, ESI-preprint 976
     (2000) [www.esi.ac.at, math-ph/0012050].
 21. Kac V. and Rudakov A., Complexes of modules over exceptional Lie
     superalgebras E(3, 8) and E(5, 10), math-ph/0112022.
 22. Kirillov A.A., “Invariant operators over geometric quantities,” Current
     problems in mathematics, 16, 3–29 (1980) (Russian), Akad. Nauk SSSR,
     Vsesoyuz. Inst. Nauchn. i Tekhn. Informatsii, Moscow, 3–29 (1980) [En-
     glish translation: J. Sov. Math. 18, no. 1, 1–21 (1982)].
 23. Kochetkov Yu., “Irreducible representations of Lie superalgebras w1 and
     w2 ,” In: Problems in group theory and homological algebra, ed. Onishchik
     A. (Yaroslav. Gos. Univ., Yaroslavl, 1985) pp. 145–147 (Russian).
 24. Kochetkov Yu., “Induced representations of Leites superalgebras,” In:
     Problems in group theory and homological algebra, ed. Onishchik A.
     (Yaroslav. Gos. Univ., Yaroslavl, 1983) pp. 120–123 (Russian).
 25. Kochetkov Yu., “Singular vectors and invariant operators,” Uspekhi Mat.
     Nauk, 43, no. 5 (263), 201–202 (1988), (Russian) [English translation:
     Russian Math. Surveys 43, no. 5, 242–243 (1988)].
 26. Kochetkov Yu., “Discrete modules for Lie superalgebras of the series Le”,
     In: Problems in group theory and homological algebra, ed. Onishchik A.
     (Yaroslav. Gos. Univ., Yaroslavl, 1989) pp. 142–148 (Russian).
 27. Kochetkov Yu., “Singular vectors, invariant operators and discrete mod-
     ules for the Lie algebra of Hamiltonian vector fields H(n),” Uspekhi Mat.
     Nauk, 44, no. 5 (269), 167–168 (1989), (Russian) [English translation:
     Russian Math. Surveys, 44, no. 5, 201–202 (1989)].
 28. Kochetkov Yu., “Singular vectors of height 2,” In: Problems in group
     theory and homological algebra, ed. Onishchik A. (Yaroslav. Gos. Univ.,
     Yaroslavl, 1990) pp. 128–132 (Russian).
 29. Kolář I, Michor P. and Slovák J., Natural operations in differential ge-
     ometry, (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1993) vi+434 pp.
 30. Larsson T., Structures Preserved by Consistently Graded Lie Superalge-
     bras, math-ph/0106004.
 31. Leites D., “New Lie superalgebras and mechanics,” Soviet Math. Dokl.
     18, no. 5, 1277–1280 (1977).
 32. Leites D., “Lie superalgebras, J. Soviet Mathematics,” 30, no. 6, 2481–
     2513 (1984).
 33. Leites D., (ed.), Seminar on supermanifolds, Vols. 1–34, 1986–90, Re-
                                  Invariant operators and Standard Models   47

    ports of Dept. of Math. University of Stockholm, 2100 pp.
34. Leites D., “On unconventional integrations on supermanifolds and cross
    ratio on classical superspaces,” In: Supersymmetries and quantum sym-
    metries, eds. Krivonos S. et al (SQS’01, Karpacz, 22–26 September,
    2001), to appear.
35. Leites D., “Indecomposable representations of Lie superalgebras,” In:
    Memorial volume dedicated to Misha Saveliev and Igor Luzenko, ed. Sis-
    sakian A. N. (JINR, Dubna, 2000) pp. 126–131.
36. Leites D., Kochetkov Yu. and Vaintrob A., “New invariant differen-
    tial operators on supermanifolds and pseudo-(co)homology,” In: General
    topology and its applications, eds. Andima S. et al (LN in pure and
    applied math, Marcel Decker, NY, 1991) Vol. 134, pp. 217–238.
37. Leites D. and Shchepochkina I., “Howe’s duality and Lie superalgebras,”
    In: S. Duplij and J. Wess (eds.) Noncommutative structures in mathe-
    matics and physics, eds.S. Duplij and J. Wess (Proc. NATO Advanced
    Research Workshop, Kiev, Kluwer, 2000) pp. 93-112.
38. Leites D. and Shchepochkina I., How to quantize antibracket, preprint
    ESI-875 [www.esi.ac.at];
    Theor. and Math. Physics, 126, no. 3, 339–369 (2001).
39. Lychagin V.V., “Contact geometry and second-order nonlinear differ-
    ential equations,” Uspekhi Mat. Nauk, 34, no. 1(205), 137–165 (1979),
    (Russian) [English translation: Russian Math. Surveys, 34, no. 1, 149–
    180 (1979)].
40. Lychagin V., Rubtsov V. and Chekalov I., “A classification of Monge-
    Ampére equations,” Ann. Sci. École Norm. Sup. (4) 26, no. 3, 281–308
    (1993).
41. Marinov M.S., “Relativistic strings and dual models of the strong interac-
    tions,” Uspehi Fiz. Nauk, 121, no. 3, 377–425 (1977) [English translation:
    Soviet Physics Uspekhi, 20, no. 3, 179–208 (1977)].
42. Penkov I. and Serganova V., “Generic irreducible representations of
    finite-dimensional Lie superalgebras,” Internat. J. Math. 5, no. 3, 389–
    419 (1994).
43. Rudakov A.N., “Irreducible representations of infinite dimensional Lie
    algebras of Cartan type,” Math. USSR Izvestiya, 38, n. 4, 835-866 (1974).
44. Rudakov A.N., “Irreducible representations of infinite dimensional Lie
    algebras of types S and H,” Math. USSR Izvestiya 39, n. 3, 496-511,
    (1975).
45. Shapovalov A.V., “Finite-dimensional irreducible representations of Ha-
    miltonian Lie superalgebras,” Mat. Sb. (N.S.), 107(149), no. 2, 259–
    274, 318, (1978) (Russian) [English translation: Math. USSR-Sb., 35,
48 P. Grozman, D. Leites and I. Shchepochkina

     no. 4, 541–554 (1979)].
 46. Shapovalov A.V., “Invariant differential operators and irreducible rep-
     resentations of finite-dimensional Hamiltonian and Poisson Lie superal-
     gebras,” Serdica, 7 (1981), no. 4, 337–342 (1982), (Russian).
 47. Shchepochkina I., “Exceptional simple infinite dimensional Lie superal-
     gebras,” C. R. Acad. Bulgare Sci. 36, no. 3, 313–314 (1983).
 48. Shchepochkina I., “Five exceptional simple Lie superalgebras of vector
     fields,” hep-th/9702121, 1997, 23 pp.;
     “The five exceptional simple Lie superalgebras of vector fields,” Funkt-
     sional. Anal. i Prilozhen., 33, no. 3, 59–72, 96 (1999), (Russian. Russian
     summary) [English translation: Funct. Anal. Appl. 33, no. 3, 208–219
     (2000)].
 49. Shchepochkina I. and Post G., “Explicit bracket in an exceptional simple
     Lie superalgebra,” Internat. J. Algebra Comput. 8 , no. 4, 479–495 (1998),
     (English. English summary).
 50. Shchepochkina I., “Five exceptional simple Lie superalgebras of vector
     fields and their fourteen regradings,” Represent. Theory (electronic jour-
     nal of AMS), 3, 373–415 (1999).
 51. Shmelev G.S., “Differential operators that are invariant with respect
     to the Lie superalgebra H(2, 2; λ) and its irreducible representations,”
     C. R. Acad. Bulgare Sci. 35, no. 3, 287–290 (1982), (Russian).
 52. Shmelev G.S., “Irreducible representations of infinite-dimensional Hamil-
     tonian and Poisson Lie superalgebras, and invariant differential opera-
     tors,” Serdica 8 (1982), no. 4, 408–417 (1983), (Russian); id., “Invariant
     operators on a symplectic supermanifold,” Mat. Sb. (N.S.) 120(162),
     no. 4, 528–539 (1983), (Russian).
 53. Shmelev G.S., “Irreducible representations of Poisson Lie superalgebras
     and invariant differential operators,” Funktsional. Anal. i Prilozhen. 17,
     no. 1, 91–92 (1983), (Russian).
 54. Shmelev G.S., “Differential H(2n, m)-invariant operators and indecom-
     posable osp(2, 2n)-representations,” Funktsional. Anal. i Prilozhen. 17,
     no. 4, 94–95 (1983), (Russian) [English translation: Funct. Anal. Appl.,
     17, no. 4, 323–325 (1983)].
 55. Terng Chuu Lian, “Natural vector bundles and natural differential oper-
     ators,” Amer. J. Math. 100, no. 4, 775–828 (1978).
 56. Veblen O., “Differential invariants and geometry,” Atti del Congresso
     Internazionale dei Matematici, Bologna, 1928.
