                                                   MOTIVIC NATURE OF CHARACTER VALUES OF
arXiv:math/0403529v1 [math.RT] 31 Mar 2004




                                                        DEPTH-ZERO REPRESENTATIONS

                                                                              JULIA GORDON


                                                    Abstract. In the present paper, it is shown that the values of Harish-
                                                    Chandra distribution characters on definable compact subsets of the
                                                    set of topologically unipotent elements of some reductive p-adic groups
                                                    can be expressed as the trace of Frobenius action on certain geometric
                                                    objects, namely, Chow motives. The result is restricted to a class of
                                                    depth-zero representations of symplectic or special orthogonal groups
                                                    that can be obtained by inflation from Deligne-Lusztig representations.
                                                    The proof works both in positive and zero characteristic, and relies on
                                                    arithmetic motivic integration.




                                                                             1. Introduction
                                                Our goal in this paper is to relate the distribution characters of depth-
                                             zero representations of p-adic groups with geometric objects, namely, Chow
                                             motives. This is part of an effort, initiated by T.C. Hales in [16], to express
                                             the concepts of representation theory of p-adic groups in such a way that
                                             would allow computations to be done without relying on the knowledge of
                                             the specific value of p (see also [17], [18] and [12]).
                                                Let G be a p-adic group, for example, G = G(Qp ) for a connected reduc-
                                             tive algebraic group G, and let π be a representation of G. Harish-Chandra
                                             [19] introduced the notion of the distribution character Θπ of π and showed
                                             that it is represented by a locally integrable function θπ on the group G.
                                             It turned out to be a difficult (and still unsolved in most cases) problem to
                                             give an explicit formula for the function θπ . There is evidence [22], [15] sug-
                                             gesting that this difficulty is due to the existence of geometric objects that
                                             turn out to be non-rational whose number of points over the finite field Fp
                                             appears in the calculation of the value of the character. This demonstrates
                                             that harmonic analysis on reductive groups is, in general, non-elementary
                                             (see [15]), and the best we can hope for is not to obtain explicit formulas
                                             for character values, but to understand the underlying geometry. The first
                                             step towards this objective would be to establish the existence of geometric
                                             objects related to the values of characters in general. This is the step we
                                             carry out here for a class of depth-zero representations. The methods we use
                                               1
                                                 supported in part by the Fields Institute and NSF.
                                               2
                                                 Keywords: Harish-Chandra character, Chow motive.
                                               3
                                                 2000 Mathematics Subject Classification 22D12, 03C10.
                                                                                       1
2                               JULIA GORDON

are completely different from the ones in [15], and based on the new theory
of arithmetic motivic integration.
   In 1995, M. Kontsevich introduced the idea of motivic integration, which
led J. Denef and F. Loeser to develop the theory of arithmetic motivic
integration. This theory is outlined briefly in the Appendix. Arithmetic
motivic integration allows to express the classical p-adic volumes of definable
subsets of p-adic manifolds in terms of trace of p-Frobenius action on virtual
Chow motives (which is, essentially, a generalization of counting Fp -points
of algebraic varieties). In [17], T.C. Hales outlined a program that applies
arithmetic motivic integration in order to relate various quantities arising in
representation theory of p-adic groups (such as orbital integrals) to geometry.
   Here we use these ideas to express some averaged values of the charac-
ter θπ in terms of the Frobenius action on a Chow motive associated with
the group, the representation, and the set of averaging. So far, such a re-
sult is restricted to the class of depth-zero supercuspidal representations of
symplectic or special orthogonal (odd) groups, which can be obtained by
inflation from Deligne-Lusztig representations. However, we expect that the
methods should generalize to a much wider class, possibly including most
supercuspidal representations.
   Acknowledgment. This work is part of a thesis written under the guid-
ance of T.C. Hales, to whom I am deeply grateful for all the advice and
help. I am indebted to Ju-Lee Kim for suggesting the key idea of using the
double cosets at the early stage of this work. Special thanks to J. Korman
for all his help in getting this paper to its present shape, to J. Diwadkar for
sharing her calculations with me, and to J. Adler and L. Spice for helpful
conversations. I am also very grateful to the referee for suggesting multiple
improvements.


                             2. The statement
2.1. Notation and assumptions. Throughout the paper, we assume that
the algebraic group G is a symplectic group G = Sp(2n) or special orthogo-
nal group G = SO(2n + 1) for some n ∈ N. Specifically, we think of Sp(2n),
resp., SO(2n + 1) as the closed subgroup of GL(2n), resp., GL(2n + 1), cut
out by the condition t gJg = J. The matrix J = (Jij ) of the size 2n (resp.,
2n + 1), in the symplectic case is defined by: Jij = 0 if i + j 6= 2n + 1,
Ji,2n+1−i = 1 if i ≤ n, and −1 otherwise, and in the orthogonal case J is
the anti-diagonal matrix with 1’s on the anti-diagonal. The reason we have
to restrict our attention only to these groups is explained in Section 5.6.
   The letter ‘F ’ will be reserved for a global field, and the letter ‘E’ – for
a local field. The symbol O with various subscripts will always be used to
denote the ring of integers of the corresponding field.
   We will denote by K the collection of all nonarchimedean completions of
a global field F . Namely, we consider two cases: if F is a number field, then
K = {Fv } is the collection of its completions at nonarchimedean places. If
                   MOTIVIC NATURE OF CHARACTER VALUES                            3

F is a function field, we denote by K the collection of all fields of the form
Fx ((t)), where x ∈ Spec OF is a closed point.
   If k is a finite field, and G – an algebraic group as above, we denote by Gk
the finite group of k-points of G, that is, the subgroup of G(k̄) consisting
of the points fixed by the Frobenius action (see, e.g., [36, Chapter I] for
details).

2.2. The representations. Let K be a collection of local fields, as defined
in Section 2.1. We would like to study the characters of representations of
the groups G(E), as E ranges over the family K. As stated in the introduc-
tion, the goal is to obtain an independent of E formula for the character. In
particular, we need the representations to be, so to say, the “incarnations
of the same representation” as we let E range over various completions of
a given global field. To make this precise, we consider a family of repre-
sentations of the groups G(E) (one representation for each group) that are
parametrized by the same combinatorial data independent of E.
   For the group G, G = SO(2n + 1) or G = Sp(2n) as above, the starting
datum is a partition w of the integer n. For each finite field Fq , w corresponds
to a conjugacy class of elliptic tori in the finite group GFq [39, Section 5.7]. In
particular, for each field E ∈ K with ring of integers OE and residue field kE ,
w corresponds to a conjugacy class of tori in GkE . We pick a torus T = TkE ,w
from this class. Deligne-Lusztig theory associates a representation RT,χ       GkE

with the data (T, χ) where χ is a character of the torus T . We let the
character χ be an arbitrary irreducible character of T in general position.
Such character exists if the characteristic of kE is large enough; it will be
explained in Section 2.4 why the choice of χ subject to these restrictions
does not matter. Let ψ = RT,χ      GkE be the Deligne-Lusztig representation

of GkE corresponding to the pair (T, χ) (see Appendix, Section 5.6). It
is a representation of GkE on a Q̄l -vector space with l 6= charkE , but its
construction does not depend either on kE or on l. We would like to be able
to vary E (and with it, kE ). Therefore, let us fix, once and for all, l = 5
(see Section 5.6 for the explanation of this choice), and only consider the
local fields in K with the residual characteristic greater than 5 from now on.
We also embed Q̄5 in C, and replace ψ with the representation ψ̄ on the
resulting complex vector space.
   The representation πE,w,χ of the group G(E) associated with the partition
w and the character χ is constructed as follows. Let KE = G(OE ). The
group KE is a maximal compact subgroup of G(E). First, we inflate the
representation ψ̄ to a representation of KE , and then induce the resulting
representation from KE to G(E) (by means of compact induction). By
‘inflation’ we mean the following process. Denote by Res : KE → GkE the
map that acts, coordinate-wise, as reduction modulo the uniformizer of the
field E. Then define the representation κ : KE → End(V ) by κ(g) :=
ψ̄(Res(g)), where V is the representation space of ψ̄. The final result of
4                               JULIA GORDON

this inflation-induction procedure is a depth-zero representation πE,w,χ =
      G(E)
c-IndKE κ of the group G(E) on a complex vector space.
   It is relevant to note here that the construction so far is not quite inde-
pendent of the field E ∈ K, because of the presence of χ. However, later
we will see that χ drops out of all calculations of the character values. For
now, it may be more precise to talk about a “pack” of representations πE,w,χ
associated with the data (E, w).
   The following known fact is important for us, so we state it as a lemma,
but do not include the proof (cf. [27, Proposition 6.8]).
Lemma 1. The representation πE,w,χ is supercuspidal.
2.3. The main theorem. Let G, K, w, χ, and πE,w,χ for almost all E ∈ K
be as in Section 2.2. For almost all E ∈ K the residual characteristic of E
is large enough so that the construction of the Section 2.2 makes sense.
   We denote the distribution character of the representation π = πE,w,χ by
Θw,E , even though it would be more precise to denote it by Θw,χ,E . We are
omitting χ from the notation because our calculations do not depend on χ.
We denote the locally summable function that represents the distribution
Θw,E by θw,E , and also call it the character of π.
   Let KErtu denote the set of regular topologically unipotent elements in
KE = G(OE ). Denote by IE the Iwahori subgroup of the group G(E) which
consists of the elements in KE whose reduction modulo the uniformizer is
an upper-triangular matrix in the standard representation.
   To state the main theorem, we need two notions: of Pas’s language, and
of virtual Chow motives. They are defined in the Appendix: Sections 5.1,
5.2, and 5.4. The completed ring of virtual Chow motives which “arise from
varieties” (see Apenndix, Section 5.4) is denoted by K̂0mot (VarF )Q .
   Let α be a formula in Pas’s language (see Appendix, Section 5.2) defining
a compact subset Γα,E = Z(α, E) ⊂ KErtu for almost all E ∈ K. Let vol
stand for the p-adic Haar measure on G = G(E) normalized so that its
restriction to KE coincides with the Serre-Oesterlé measure (see Appendix,
Section 5.5).
Theorem 2. Given G, w and K as above, there exists a virtual Chow motive
Mα,w ∈ K̂0mot (VarF )Q , such that for almost all E ∈ K, the following equality
holds:
                                     Z
     vol(IE )Θw,E (Γα,E ) = vol(IE )      θw,E (γ) dγ = T rF robE (Mα,w ),
                                     Γα,E

where F robE is the Frobenius action corresponding to the place of F that
gave rise to the field E, and Θw,E (Γα,E ) stands for the value of the distri-
bution Θw,E at the characteristic function of the set Γα,E .
   As announced in the introduction, this theorem states that the value of
the distribution character on a definable compact subset of K rtu can be
recovered from a geometric object (namely, a virtual Chow motive), up to
                  MOTIVIC NATURE OF CHARACTER VALUES                           5

a factor which is a polynomial in the cardinality of the residue field (the
volume of the Iwahori subgroup).

2.4. Remarks. 1. A new version of the theory of motivic integration, that
is about to appear, yields that the ring of virtual Chow motives does not
need to be completed in order to define the elements Mα,w (see Appendix,
Section 5.4).
   2. The reason we restrict our attention only to the topologically unipotent
elements is the following. Recall that the irreducible character χ of the torus
in the finite group GkE is part of the construction of the representation π
which does not have a nice combinatorial parametrization. However, as we
will see in the next section, the value of θw,E at a topologically unipotent
element is expressed through the values of the character of Deligne-Lusztig
representation ψ̄ that gave rise to π at unipotent conjugacy classes. Those
values, in turn, are expressed by Green polynomials (see Appendix, Section
5.6, for a brief review and references). We are using the fact that the values
of the Green polynomials at unipotent elements do not depend on the choice
of the character χ.
   3. We are considering the averages of the function θw,E over some defin-
able subsets of KErtu . The other way of saying this is to say that we look at
the values of the distribution character Θw,E itself at the characteristic func-
tions of those subsets. In fact, we would like to study the individual values
θw,E (γ) at regular elements. Pas’s language, which is one of our main tools,
does not allow to handle individual elements of p-adic fields or p-adic groups.
As a function on the set of regular elements in the p-adic group G(E), the
character θw,E (γ) is locally constant. However, there are no explicit results
that say “how small” the sets on which θw,E is constant might be. This
forces us to average θw,E over some sets that we can control. However, the
actual shape of the sets of averaging is flexible (the only requirement being
that they are definable, see Section 5.2).
   The rest of the paper is devoted to the proof of Theorem 2. In the next
section we do an entirely p-adic calculation which serves as a preparation for
the proof, and in Section 4 we give it a motivic interpretation, which leads
to the desired result.

               3. The Character: a p-adic calculation
   Throughout this section we adhere to a fixed local field E with a uni-
formizer ̟, ring of integers O, and residue field k = O/(̟). Since the field
E stays fixed here, we drop the subscript E from all notation for simplicity.

3.1. Character of an induced representation. Let π be a representation
of G = G(E) obtained from a Deligne-Lusztig representation ψ̄ of Gk by
the inflation and induction procedure described in Section 2.2. By Lemma
1, π is supercuspidal.
   We fix K := KE – a maximal compact subgroup of G, and let I = IE .
6                                JULIA GORDON

   We denote by ρ the character of the representation ψ̄, and by ρ̃ : K → C
– the character of its inflation to K. Note that the value ρ̃(g) at g ∈ K
depends only on the reduction of g modulo ̟.
   Let Γ be a compact subset of K rtu . By the Frobenius-type formula for
induced character, [31, Theorem 1.9] and [1, Theorem A.14(ii)] (see also the
Remark at the end of the Appendix in [1]), the value of the character θw (γ)
can be expressed as a sum that is finite uniformly for all γ ∈ Γ:
                                                        
                              X         X
(1)               θw (γ) =                   ρ̃(y −1 γy) .
                             a∈I\G/K    y∈IaK/K

Note that in [31], the double cosets are taken with respect to the same sub-
group on the left and right; however, the modification we are using here can
be obtained in the exactly same way. Our version of the formula coincides
with the formula in [1].

3.2. The double cosets. The indexing set I\G/K in the outer sum in (1)
can be described using a version of the Iwasawa decomposition.
   Let A be the split standard torus in G. We can think of the elements of A
as diagonal matrices of the form diag(ui ̟ λi )i=1,...,r with ui ∈ O∗ and λi ∈ Z
satisfying the relations forced by the definition of the group (for example,
in the symplectic case, ui = u−1   r−i and λi = −λr−i ). Then, by a version of
Iwasawa decomposition, G = IAK [21].
   Observe that the intersection of the subgroups I and A is exactly the
intersection of A with K. It follows that every left coset of G modulo K has
a representative of the form ya with y ∈ I and a ∈ A0 , where A0 is the set of
elements in A of the form aλ = diag(̟ λi )i=1,...,r , where λ = (λi )i=1,...,r ∈ Zr
satisfies the conditions mentioned above. In particular, the set of double
cosets I\G/K is in bijection with the set A0 .
   Fix a multi-index (λi )i=1,...,r that gives an element aλ ∈ A0 .
Definition 3. We call the elements y1 , y2 ∈ I λ-equivalent if y1 aλ and y2 aλ
belong to the same left K-coset (that is, a−1  −1
                                           λ y1 y2 aλ ∈ K). We denote the
λ-equivalence class of y ∈ I by [y]λ .
   As an element of the torus A, aλ may be considered as a lift of an element
of the extended Weyl group of G. Let lλ be the length of this element. By
a theorem of Iwahori and Matsumoto [21], the set of λ-equivalence classes
is in bijection with Alλ (k).
   The following two simple observations will be used below, so we state
them as a lemma. We keep the same notation as above, and let q = |O/(̟)|
denote the cardinality of the residue field.
Lemma 4. 1. If y1 and y2 are λ-equivalent, then the elements
(y1 aλ )−1 γ(y1 aλ ) and (y2 aλ )−1 γ(y2 aλ ) are conjugate by an element of K.
2. All the λ-equivalence classes have equal volumes, equal to vol(I)  q lλ
                                                                           .
                  MOTIVIC NATURE OF CHARACTER VALUES                           7

Proof. The first statement is obvious: (y1 aλ )−1 γ(y1 aλ )
= k(y2 aλ )−1 γ(y2 aλ )k−1 , where k = a−1    −1
                                           λ y1 y2 aλ ∈ K by definition of λ-
equivalence.
   To show the second assertion, note that y and y0 are λ-equivalent if and
only if y −1 ∈ aλ Ka−1   −1
                      λ y0 ∩ I. Hence the volume of each equivalence class
equals the volume of the set I ∩ aλ Ka−1   λ (since the group G is reductive,
it is unimodular, and therefore the operation of taking an inverse preserves
the Haar measure). Let us compute this volume. The total number of
equivalence classes within the Iwahori subgroup I equals q lλ . Hence, the
volume of each equivalence class is vol(I)
                                      q lλ
                                            .                              

3.3. A formula for the character. First, let us introduce some notation.
Let C be a conjugacy class in the finite group Gk , and let γ ∈ K rtu . For λ ∈
Zr as in the previous section, denote by NCλ (γ) the number of λ-equivalence
classes [y]λ of elements of I such that the following conditions are satisfied:
      i) (ya)−1 γ(ya) ∈ K for any y ∈ [y]λ
     ii) Res((ya)−1 γ(ya)) ∈ C for any y ∈ [y]λ .
The condition (i) is well defined by Lemma 4. Let NC (γ) = λ NCλ (γ). We
                                                                P
observe that for each element γ ∈ K rtu the sum is finite, because the set of
classes [y]λ satisfying the condition (i) is nonempty only for a finite set of
multi-indices λ, by [1, Theorem A.14(ii)].
   Using the fact that ρ̃ is a lift of the character ρ of the finite group Gk ,
the sum (1) can be rewritten as a sum over the conjugacy classes C of Gk :
                     X          X                   X
(2)         θw (γ) =                        ρ(C) =      NC (γ)ρ(C),
                     C           (λ,[y]λ )           C
                         ∀y∈[y]λ(ya)−1 γ(ya)∈K,
                          Res((ya)−1 γ(ya))∈C


where C runs over the conjugacy classes of Gk .
Lemma 5. 1. If Γ is a compact subset of the set of regular elements in G,
then there exists a finite set AΓ of indices λ so that NCλ (γ) = 0 for all γ ∈ Γ
and λ ∈/ AΓ .
2. If γ is topologically unipotent, only the unipotent conjugacy classes C
appear in the summation in (1).
Proof. The first statement is part of the statement of [1, Theorem A.14(ii)].
(In [1], the Theorem is stated only for GLn and its relatives, but as the
authors point out at the end of the Appendix, the argument carries over to
classical groups without any changes.)
   The second statement is based on the following two simple observations.
First, the eigenvalues of Res(γ) are obtained from the eigenvalues of γ by
reduction modulo the uniformizer of the valuation extended to the algebraic
closure of the field E. Second, it follows, for example, from [2, Lemma 2.2]
that the eigenvalues of a topologically unipotent element (in the algebraic
closure of the given local field) are congruent to 1.                      
8                               JULIA GORDON

3.4. Averages. Let Γ be a compact subset of K = G(O). The goal is to
express the average Θw (Γ) of the values of θw over the set Γ as the p-adic
volume of some p-adic object. In the next section we will use Denef and
Loeser’s “comparison theorem” to relate the resulting p-adic volume to a
Chow motive. We do it by means of artificially constructing some subsets
of G × G whose p-adic volumes equal the numbers NC (γ) that appear in
formula (2), and showing that these subsets are definable.
   Consider the Cartesian product
                                X = G ×O G.
Fix an element a = aλ as above and consider the double coset Da = IaK ⊂
G. Let WλE (Γ) be the subset of X (O) defined by
              WλE (Γ) = {(y, γ) | y ∈ I, γ ∈ Γ, a−1 y −1 γya ∈ K}.
    The set WλE (Γ) is partitioned into subsets
             E
            WC,λ (Γ) = {(y, γ) ∈ WλE (Γ) | Res((ya)−1 γ(ya)) ∈ C},
where C runs over the unipotent conjugacy classes of Gk .
          E (γ) ⊂ I be the projection onto the first coordinate of the cross-
   Let WC,λ
             E (Γ) with fixed γ ∈ Γ.
section of WC,λ
   Let vol be the Haar measure on G(E) normalized so that its restriction
to K coincides with the Serre-Oesterlé measure. Then the space X (O) has
the natural product measure.
Main Observation. Up to a normalization factor, the number NCλ (γ)
                                                  E (γ):
defined in Section 3.3 is the volume of the set WC,λ

                                     q lλ
                        NCλ (γ) =               E
                                           vol(WC,λ (γ)),
                                    vol(I)
where q is the cardinality of the residue field k, lλ is an integer that depends
only on λ, and I is the Iwahori subgroup.
Proof. Fix a multi-index λ. By definition, NCλ (γ) is the number of equiv-
alence classes [y]λ of the elements y ∈ I that satisfy the conditions (i) and
                E (γ) is a disjoint union of these equivalence classes. Recall
(ii). The set WC,λ
that by Lemma 3.2, all λ-equivalence classes have equal volumes, equal to
vol(I)
  ql
       . Hence,
    λ

                                   q lλ
                        NCλ (γ) =              E
                                         vol(WC,λ (γ)).
                                  vol(I)
In the next section, we will also need the following property of the normal-
ization factor that appears in the above formula.
                                      lλ
                                  q
Remark 6. The factor p(q) = vol(I)    , as a function of q, is an element of
Z(x), since the volume of I is a polynomial in q with coefficients in Z that
depends only on the group G.
                   MOTIVIC NATURE OF CHARACTER VALUES                                           9

   Consider the average (with respect to the Haar measure vol defined above)
of the values of θw over the set Γ. In order to get rid of denominators, we
multiply it by vol(I).
(3)                       Z                               Z XX
vol(I)Θw (Γ) = vol(I)             θw (γ) dγ = vol(I)                    NCλ (γ)ρ(C)
                              Γ                            Γ C      λ
                  XX                       Z
(4)           =           ρ(C)q lλ                   E
                                                vol(WC,λ (γ)) dγ
                  C   λ                    Γ
                  XX                       ZZ                       XX
                                      lλ
(5)           =           ρ(C)q                          1 dydγ =             ρ(C)q lλ vol(WC,λ
                                                                                            E
                                                                                                (Γ)).
                                                 E (Γ)
                                                WC,λ
                  C   λ                                             C     λ

Note that the sum and the integral in the expression (4) can be interchanged
because the summation over λ, in fact, runs over a finite set AΓ , by Lemma
5. This equality is the basis for our main result, as the next section shows.

                          4. Motivic interpretation
4.1. Varying the field. In this section, we complete the proof of Theo-
rem 2 by associating virtual Chow motives with the subsets WC,λ       E (Γ) from

the previous section using arithmetic motivic integration. This leads to an
expression of the average value of θw as a trace of Frobenius on a certain
virtual Chow motive.
   Throughout this section, we work with the notation and all the assump-
tions of Theorem 2, so that K is the collection of all nonarchimedean com-
pletions of a given global field F ; G, π, w are as in Section 2.2, α is a formula
in Pas’s language, and for E ∈ K, Γα,E is a definable subset of KE defined
by the formula α. As in Theorem 2, we are assuming that Γα,E is contained
in the set of regular topologically unipotent elements in KE . In order to
justify the assumption that a definable set Γα,E can be contained in K rtu ,
we would like to show that the set K rtu itself is definable.
Lemma 7. Let E ∈ K be a local field. Let K = KE . Then
      1. The set K rtu is definable.
      2. The Iwahori subgroup IE is a definable subset of KE .
Proof. 1. Let γ be an element of K rtu . We use the standard representation
of the group G to think of γ as a matrix γ = (xij ), and let the ‘xij ’ be the
free variables in all our logical formulas. We use the following definition of
regular [24]. Let n be the dimension of G and l be the rank of G. Then the
element γ is regular if and only if Dl (γ) 6= 0, where Dl (γ) is defined by the
following expression:
                                                              n−1
                                                              X
                  det((t + 1)In − Ad(γ)) = tn +                     Dj (γ)tj .
                                                              j=0
10                               JULIA GORDON

We observe that Ad(γ) can be thought of as a matrix expression whose en-
tries are polynomials in xij , and hence Dl (γ) is also a polynomial expression
in the variables xij . Therefore, ‘Dl (γ) 6= 0’ is a formula in Pas’s language.
In conjunction with the formulas coming from the equations of the group G
as an affine variety, and with the Pas’s language formulas ‘ord(xij ) ≥ 0’ for
each index (i, j), this formula defines the set of regular elements in K.
   To cut out the subset of topologically unipotent elements, we use Lemma
5, which implies that γ is topologically unipotent if and only if the element
Res(γ) is unipotent, and then use the combinatorial (independent of the
field) parametrization of the set of unipotent conjugacy classes in the finite
group Gk (where k is the residue field of E). The details are part of the
proof of Lemma 9 below.
   2. The Iwahori subgroup I that we are considering is defined by the
formulas ‘ord(xij ) ≥ 0’, i ≤ j, in conjunction with the formulas ‘ord(xij ) ≥
1’ for all pairs of indices (i, j) with i > j.                                
4.2. Preparation: the subsets WC,λ      E (Γ
                                             α,E ) are definable. We start by
fixing a multi-index λ, and considering the corresponding double coset Da ,
as in Section 3.4. Let l = lλ . Recall that α stands for a formula in Pas’s
language that defines a compact subset Γα,E of KErtu for almost all E ∈ K.
Since we are keeping α fixed, in this section we drop ‘Γα,E ’ from the notation,
and denote the sets whose definability we wish to prove simply by WC,λ    E .

Lemma 8. Let λ be a fixed index. Under the assumptions of Theorem 2,
WλE (Γα,E ) is a definable subset of G × G(E) for E ∈ K.
Proof. Suppose for a moment that the field E ∈ K is fixed, an element
y = (yij ) ∈ IE is fixed, and take γ = (γij ) ∈ Γα,E . We observe that each
matrix coefficient of the matrix y −1 γy is a polynomial, with coefficients in Z,
homogeneous in the variables yij and linear in the variables γij . We denote
these polynomials by Pκη (yij , γij ), κ, η = 1, . . . , r. The conjugation by aλ
multiplies each entry of y −1 γy by an integral power of the uniformizer that
depends only on the multi-index λ. We denote these powers by nκη .
   Consider the formulas
(6)
  ‘ordPκη (yij , γij ) + nκη ≥ 0’, ‘ord(yij ) ≥ 0’, i ≤ j, ‘ord(yij ) ≥ 1’, i > j.
   Let φ be the conjunction of all the formulas (6) and the formula α in the
variables γij that defines Γα,E . Then WλE (Γα,E ) = Z(φ, E) in the notation
of Section 5.2 of the Appendix.                                            
                      E are definable.
Lemma 9. The subsets WC,λ
Proof. Suppose for a moment that a local field E ∈ K is fixed. All we need
to show is that the set of topologically unipotent elements y ∈ K such that
Res(y) ∈ C is definable for each conjugacy class C of the group Gk that
appears in the summation (3). In order to write a formula that cuts out this
set, we let the matrix coefficients of y be the free variables, as before.
                   MOTIVIC NATURE OF CHARACTER VALUES                            11

   First of all, we observe that the symbol ‘Res’ can be used in formulas in
Pas’s language with the following meaning: if ϕ(y) is an expression in Pas’s
language with y – a variable of the residue field sort, then we set ϕ(Res(x))
(where x is a free variable of the valued field sort) to be ϕ1 ∨ ϕ2 , where
ϕ1 :=‘ord(x) = 0’∧ϕ(ac(x)), and ϕ2 :=‘ord(x) > 0’∧ϕ(0). Also, if x is
an abbreviation for a matrix or a vector of free variables, we understand
‘Res(x)’ in a natural way, as the application of the symbol ‘Res’ to each
component of x, as described above.
   Since Γα,E , by assumption, is contained in the set of topologically unipo-
tent elements in G, only the unipotent conjugacy classes C appear in (3), by
Lemma 5. As described in the Appendix, Section 5.7, the set of unipotent
conjugacy classes C is in bijection with the set of purely combinatorial data
{(Λ, (ǫi ))}, where Λ is a partition of r, and ǫi ∈ kE   ∗ /k ∗ 2 (where k is the
                                                             E            E
residue field of E). Suppose that the class C corresponds to a pair (Λ, (ǫi )).
We think of (ǫi ) as a sequence with entries 0 or 1.
   In order to write down the logical formula φΛ,(ǫi ) cutting out the set of
elements whose reductions fall into the conjugacy class C, we need to unwind
the process described in Section 5.7 that associates C with the data (Λ, (ǫi )).
   First, for y ∈ K, y – topologically unipotent, let Y = (1 − y)(1 + y)−1
be the Cayley transform of y (note that the matrix 1 + y is invertible, since
y is assumed to be topologically unipotent). The element Y lies in the
Lie algebra of G over the given p-adic field. Let Ỹ1 = det(1 + y)Y , and
let ‘Y1 ’=‘Res(Ỹ1 )’ (so that ‘Y1 ’ in all formulas is treated as a matrix with
components ranging over the residue field sort, even though, to be precise,
all the formulas involving ‘Y1 ’ would be conjunctions of formulas with free
variables ranging over the valued field sort, namely, the matrix coefficients
of Ỹ1 ). Note that the matrix coefficients of Ỹ1 are polynomials, with Z-
coefficients, in the matrix coefficients of y. Hence, finally, the abbreviation
‘Y1 ’ can be used instead of ‘y’ in all subsequent formulas, and we treat it
just as a matrix with components of the residue filed sort.
   The first part of the data, Λ, prescribes the set of Jordan blocks of the
matrix Y , which is the same as the set of Jordan blocks of Y1 . The set of
all elements Y1 whose Jordan blocks match the partition Λ is defined by

(7)                  ‘∃(gij )i,j=1,...,r : (gij )Y1 (gij )−1 = JΛ ’,

where JΛ is the matrix with entries 0 and 1, consisting of Jordan blocks
given by the partition Λ. Note, again, that in fact formula (7) has only free
variables of the valued field sort, that is, the matrix coefficients ‘yij ’ (we see
that by unwinding the abbreviation ‘Y1 ’). All the variables ranging over the
residue field sort (that is, ‘gij ’) are bound. Hence, logical formula (7) cuts
out a definable set.
   Second, we need to cut out the subset of this definable set that corresponds
to the given sequence (ǫi ). Recall (from Section 5.7) that the sequence (ǫi )
comes from a collection of quadratic forms on the vector spaces Vi . Let
12                                       JULIA GORDON

ci = dim Vi . We will need to introduce separately a few components of the
final formula that would define WC,λ        E .

   Let us look at one entry ǫi corresponding to the vector space (Vi , qi ).
   Let ‘li(v1 , . . . , vm )’ be the logical formula with the free variables v11 , . . . , vmr
that states that the vectors v1 = t (v11 , . . . , v1r ), . . . , vm = t (vm1 , . . . , vmr ) are
linearly independent (here r = dim V ), see [12].
   Let ‘kerA (v)’ be the logical formula stating that the vector v is anni-
hilated by the linear operator A, where ‘A’ is a matrix of logical terms.
The free variables of this formula are the components of v and the matrix
coefficients of A. Let ‘q-span(Y1 , v1 , . . . , vm )’ be the formula with free vari-
ables v1 , . . . , vm and Y1 (each of which is an abbreviation for a vector or
a matrix, respectively), which is the conjunction of the formulas kerY i (vj ),
                                                                                          1
j = 1, . . . , m and the following:
                                                ‘∀u∃(a1 , . . . , am )    ∧ ∃v ′ ∧ ∃v ′′
                                                                         m
                                                                         X
                         ′                 ′′           ′         ′′
             kerY i−1 (v ) ∧ kerY i+1 (v )          ∧ v + Y1 v +               ai vi = u’,
                   1               1
                                                                         i=1

where aj are scalars, and v ′ , v ′′ , u are abbreviations for r-vectors (all exis-
tential quantifiers in this formula range over the residue field sort). This
formula states that the vectors v1 , . . . , vm span ker(Y1i ) modulo ker(Y1i−1 ) +
Y1 ker(Y1i+1 ). Let J be the matrix of the quadratic form qV , that is, the ma-
trix from the definition of G as a subgroup of GL(r). Let ‘Gram(v1 , . . . , vc )’
stand for the matrix of formal expressions that gives the Gram matrix of
the basis v1 , . . . , vc with respect to the quadratic form defined by the matrix
t (Y i−1 w)Jw ′ .
     1
    If the ǫi given is 1, let ‘ψi (y)’ be the formula:
                                          ‘∃(v1 , . . . , vci ) ∧ q-span(Y1 , v1 , . . . , vci )
      ∧li(v1 , . . . , vci ) ∧ ∃(z ∈ k    z 2 = det(Gram(v1 , . . . , vci )) ∧ z 6= 0).’
     If the ǫi given is 0, let ‘ψi (y)’ be the formula:
                                          ‘∃(v1 , . . . , vci ) ∧ q-span(Y1 , v1 , . . . , vci )
      ∧li(v1 , . . . , vci ) ∧ ∄(z ∈ k    z 2 = det(Gram(v1 , . . . , vci )) ∧ z 6= 0).’
  Finally, it follows from Section 5.7 that the set WC,λ  E is defined by the

conjunction of ψi (y) for all i and the formula defining the set WλE (Γα,E ). 

4.3. Proof of Theorem 2. Let K be the collection of local fields as in the
statement of the theorem. Let E ∈ K. By the formulas (3) – (5), the value
vol(I )Θ (Γ ) is a sum over λ of the expressions of the form
P E wl α,E E
   C ρ(C)q vol(WC,λ (Γα,E )). We are now ready to write down the corre-
           λ

sponding motivic expression for each of these terms.
   Let us fix λ for now. Let X = G × G as before. By Lemmas 8 and 9,
            E (Γ
the sets WC,λ    α,E ) are definable subsets of X (E), i.e., there exist formulas
                    MOTIVIC NATURE OF CHARACTER VALUES                               13

φC,λ in Pas’s language, such that WC,λE (Γ
                                           α,E ) = Z(φC,λ , E) (in the notation
of Appendix, Section 5.2). Let MC,λ = µ(φC,λ ) ∈ K̂0mot (VarF )Q be the
arithmetic motivic volume of the formula φC,λ (see Appendix, Section 5.5).
   By [37], ρ(C) is a polynomial in q for each C, where q is the cardinality
of the residue field of E. Denote this polynomial by fC (q), and let M̃C,λ =
fC (L)Llλ MC,λ , where L is the Lefschetz motive (see Appendix, Section 5.4),
so that M̃C,λ is also an element of the ring K̂0mot (VarF )Q .
   Finally, let               X
                      Mλ =        M̃C,λ ∈ K̂0mot (VarF )Q ,
                               (Λ,(ǫi ))
where (Λ, (ǫi )) is the data parametrizing the unipotent conjugacy classes C,
as in Section 5.7.
   By Theorem 8.3.1, [9] (respectively, Theorem 8.3.2 in the function field
case, see also Appendix, Section 5.5),
                          ZZ
(8)             q lλ ρ(C)            1 dydγ = T rF robE (MC,λ )
                              E (Γ
                             WC,λ α,E )

for almost all completions E of F , and hence the sum of the expressions on
the left-hand side of (8) over C equals T rF robE (Mλ ) for almost all E.
   In order to obtain the final result, it remains to sum up both sides of the
above formula over λ. In order to be able to do this, we need to take care of
the following subtle “uniformity” issue. For each local field E individually,
we know that the sum over λ is finite, by Lemma 5. However, we do not
know whether this finite set of indices λ (denoted by AΓ in Lemma 5) is the
same for almost all places. Another difficulty (which would be automatically
resolved if we knew the affirmative answer to the above question) is that for
each λ, the formula (8) holds for all but a finite number of places. We need
to show that overall (i.e. for all λ altogether) the set of places that needs to
be eliminated is finite. These difficulties are taken care of by the following
Theorem due to T.C. Hales [18, Theorem 2].
   First, we need to introduce a notation. Let ϑ(m1 , . . . , ml ) be a formula
in Pas’s language, with free variables ranging over N. Let K be a collection
of local fields. For E ∈ K, denote by ϑE (m1 , . . . , ml ) the interpretation of ϑ
in the model for Pas’s language given by the field E.
Lemma 10. [18, Theorem 2] Let ϑ(m1 , . . . , ml ) be a formula in Pas’s lan-
guage. Suppose that there exists a finite set of prime numbers S ⊂ N, such
that for any E ∈ K, if the residual characteristic of E is not in S, then
{(m1 , . . . , ml ) ∈ Nl | ϑE (m1 , . . . , ml )} is a bounded subset of Nl . Then there
exists a finite set of primes S ′ , S ⊂ S ′ ⊂ N, and exists a bounded set C ⊂ Nl ,
such that for any E ∈ K, if the residual characteristic of E is not in S ′ , then
{(m1 , . . . , ml ) ∈ Nl | ϑE (m1 , . . . , ml )} ⊂ C.
  For each element of the finite set of parameters corresponding to the
conjugacy classes C, we apply Lemma 10 to the formula ϑ(λ) :=‘∃x :
14                               JULIA GORDON

φC,λ (x)’, where φC,λ (x) is the formula of Lemma 9 that defines the sub-
        E (Γ
sets WC,λ                      E                                       E
             α,E ). That is, ϑ (λ) takes the value ‘true’ iff the set WC,λ (Γα,E )
is not empty (here we understand the symbol λ as an abbreviation for the
l-tuple of variables (m1 , . . . , ml ).) By Lemma 5, for any E such that the
notation WC,λE makes sense (that is, for all but finitely many fields E ∈ K),

the set {λ | ϑE (λ)} is finite. Hence, the assumption of Lemma 10 holds. We
conclude that there exists a finite set of primes S ′ such that whenever the
residual characteristic of E does not fall in this set, {λ | ϑE (λ)} ⊂ C, where
                                            l
                          P subset of N .
C is a bounded (i.e., finite)
   Finally, set Mα,w = λ Mλ , where the summation is over the union of
finite sets C that correspond to the data defining the conjugacy classes C
(which is a finite union of finite sets, so the sum is finite). This completes
the proof.

                     5. Appendix: Some Background
   This section is a compilation of brief reviews of various concepts and
techniques from logic, algebraic geometry, and representation theory that
we used above.
5.1. Pas’s language. We need to deal with families of local fields (e.g. all
possible nonarchimedean completions of a given number field). Therefore, it
is necessary to set up a framework that allows to exploit the structure of a
local field without referring to its individual features such as the uniformizer
of the valuation, for example. This is achieved by using a formal language
of logic, which has the terms for the valuation, etc., but does not have the
term for a uniformizer. This language is called Pas’s language.
   A sentence in Pas’s language for a valued field E is allowed to have vari-
ables of three kinds: variables running over the valued field E (the valued
field sort), variables running over its residue field k (the residue field sort),
and variables running over Z (the value sort). Formally, it is a three-sorted
first order language [10].
   For variables of the valued field sort and for variables of the residue field
sort, the language has the operations of addition (‘+’) and multiplication
(‘×’); for variables of the value sort (i.e., for Z), only addition is allowed.
The value sort, additionally, has symbols ≤, and ≡n for congruence modulo
each value n ∈ N.
   The language also has symbols for universal (‘∀’) and existential (‘∃’)
quantifiers, and standard symbols ∧, ∨, ¬, respectively, for logical con-
junction, disjunction, and negation. We note that the restriction of Pas’s
language to the residue field sort coincides with the first order language of
rings [10].
   Naturally, there are symbols denoting all the integers in the value sort.
In the valued field sort, there are symbols ‘0’ and ‘1’, defined as the symbols
denoting the additive and multiplicative unit, respectively. Once we have
these, we can formally add to the language the symbols denoting other
                   MOTIVIC NATURE OF CHARACTER VALUES                           15

integers in the valued field sort. Thus, ‘2’ is the abbreviation for ‘1 + 1’,
‘−1’ is the abbreviation for ‘∃x, x + 1 = 0’, etc. Notice that there are no
symbols denoting other elements of the valued field, in particular, there is
no symbol for the uniformizer. This, of course, agrees with our goal of being
able to use the same language for any local field within a given family. We
illustrate the allowed operations with the following example.
Example 11. We are not allowed to use any symbols for constants in the
valued field. For example, the expression ‘a1 x + a2 y = 0’ makes sense in
Pas’s language only if a1 , a2 , x and y are all treated on equal footing, as
variables of the same sort.
   The language also contains the following symbols denoting functions: the
symbol ‘ord’ for the valuation – a function from the valued field sort to the
value sort, and the symbol ‘ac’ to denote the angular component map from
the valued field sort to the residue field sort (the role of this map will be
explained in Section 5.2). We also add the symbol ‘∞’ to the value sort, to
denote the valuation of 0.
   There is a theorem due to Pas [29] that this language admits quantifier
elimination of the quantifiers ranging over the valued field sort and over the
value sort (this is the reason for the absence of multiplication for the integers:
otherwise, by Gödel’s theorem, there would be no quantifier elimination).
This means that every formula in Pas’s language can be replaced by an
equivalent formula without quantifiers ranging over the valued field sort or
over the value sort. Further, a theorem due to Presburger [30] states that
the quantifiers ranging over the residue field can also be eliminated, so that
every formula in Pas’s language can be replaced by an equivalent formula
without quantifiers. Ultimately, it is this property that makes arithmetic
motivic integration possible [9].

5.2. Definable subsets for p-adics. This subsection is, essentially, quoted
from [9, Sections 8.2, 8.3].
   Let E be the field of fractions of a complete discrete valuation ring OE
with finite residue field k. It is possible to think of E as a structure (in
the sense of logic) for Pas’s language. That is, we can let the variables in
the formulas in Pas’s language range over E and k respectively, and then
each formula will have true/false value. In order to match Pas’s language
with the structure of the field E completely, we need to give a meaning to
the symbols that express functions in Pas’s language. We fix a uniformizing
parameter ̟. The valuation on E is normalized so that ord(̟) = 1. If
x ∈ OE∗ is a unit, there is a natural definition of ac(x) – it is the reduction

of x modulo the ideal (̟). Define, for x 6= 0 in E, ac(x) = ac(̟ −ord(x) x),
and ac(0) = |0| = 0.
   Now let us take F – a finite extension of Q with ring of integers OF .
Following [9], we let R = O[ N1 ], for some non zero integer N which is a
multiple of the discriminant of F . Let v be a closed point of Spec R. We
16                               JULIA GORDON

denote by Fv the completion of the localization of R at v, by OFv – its ring
of integers, and by kv – the residue field. If N equals the discriminant of F ,
then {Fv } is the family of all completions of F at the places lying over the
primes in Q that do not ramify in F .
   In Section 5.1, we formally added to Pas’s language the symbols to denote
all integers in the valued field sort. In order to work with the family of fields
K = {Fv }, it is convenient to also add to Pas’s language, for every element
of the global field F , a symbol to denote this element in the valued field sort.
This allows to “have constants from F ” in the formulas in Pas’s language.
We will call this extended language the Pas’s language for the valued field
F ((t)). The reason for this is that F ((t)) is, naturally, a valued field (t being
the uniformizer of the valuation), and every logical formula in the extended
Pas’s language for this field also makes sense as a formula in the extended
Pas’s language for every completion of the field F . It is through interpreting
the Pas’s language formulas in the model given by the field F ((t)) that one
eventually arrives at geometric objects associated with them (see [17, Section
6.1]).
Definition 12. Let φ be a formula in the Pas’s language for the valued field
F ((t)), with m free variables running over the valued field sort and no free
variables running over the residue field sort or the value sort. For each v – a
place of F , and E = Fv – the corresponding completion, denote by Z(φ, OE )
the subset of OE    m defined by the formula φ: Z(φ, O ) = {(x , . . . , x ) ∈
                                                           E         1      m
  m
O | φ(x1 , . . . , xm )} (recall that φ has the values true/false). A subset B ⊂
OEm is called definable if there exists a formula φ such that B = Z(φ, O ).
                                                                             E

   For example, if V ֒→ Am is an affine variety, V (Zp ) is a definable subset of
Zmp (it can be defined by a logical formula with m free variables which does
not use the symbols ‘ac’ and ‘ord’: just the polynomial relations defining
the variety V ).
   So far, we have defined the notion of a definable subset of OE  m = Am (O ).
                                                                              E
This definition extends naturally to give a notion of a definable subset of an
affine variety X over OE .
   Let X be a smooth variety over F of dimension d. There is a natural d-
dimensional measure on X (OFv ) for each v, which we shall denote by volX ,Fv .
This is the Serre-Oesterlé measure, [28], [34]. All definable subsets of X (OFv )
are measurable with respect to this measure, when F has characteristic 0,
[5]. This measure is defined by requiring that the fibers of the reduction
map modulo ̟v have volume q −d , where q is the cardinality of the residue
field OFv /(̟v ).
   In the Section 5.5, we describe the theory of arithmetic motivic integration
which associates algebraic geometric objects with logical formulas. For each
place v, there is a linear operator (Frobenius) acting on the cohomology
of these objects, and its trace on the object associated with the formula φ
equals the Serre-Oesterlé volume of the set Z(φ, OFv ) for almost all v.
                   MOTIVIC NATURE OF CHARACTER VALUES                           17

5.3. Motivic measures. The purpose of this subsection is twofold. The
first goal is to outline the context for the ideas from the theory of motivic
integration that we are using and to give some background references. The
second objective is to let someone who is an expert in motivic integration
know exactly to what extent the theory is being used in this paper. All the
precise definitions and statements that we need are quoted in the next three
subsections.
   The term motivic integration first appeared in M. Kontsevich’s lecture
at Orsay in 1995. Let k be an algebraically closed field of characteristic 0,
and let X be an algebraic variety over k. Motivic measure lives on the arc
space of X , i.e. on the “infinite-dimensional variety” whose set of k-points
coincides with the set of k[[t]]-points of X . It is a measure in every sense
(i.e., it is additive, it transforms under morphisms in a such a way that
makes it analogous to measures on real or p-adic manifolds, etc.), but its
nature is algebraic, and its values are not real or complex numbers, but,
roughly speaking, equivalence classes of varieties. The theory of motivic
integration is, in fact, a theory about the motivic measure. The functions
[on the arc space] that can be integrated against this measure are scarce.
Due to algebraic nature of the measure, the algebra of measurable subsets
of the arc space is rather coarse: it is, essentially, generated by the sets
“growing out” of subvarieties of X . For background information on the
original motivic integration we refer to [3], [7], [8], and to the Bourbaki talk
by E. Looijenga [25].
   The arithmetic motivic integration developed by J. Denef and F. Loeser
in 1999 [9] uses similar ideas, but it is an independent theory. The main
difference is that it is adapted to deal with sets of rational points of the given
variety over various fields, as opposed to the less flexible original theory
which is suited only to deal with the arc space of the given variety, and not
its rational points. The arithmetic motivic volume takes values in virtual
Chow motives.
   Instead of the arc space itself, the arithmetic motivic volume lives on
definable subassignments of the functor of its points. This distinction al-
lows one to work directly at the level of rational points [9]. The definable
subassignments are, in a sense, a geometric incarnation of logical formulas
in Pas’s language. We will not need these geometric objects, since all the
varieties we deal with here are smooth and affine. Hence, we will assign
“motivic volumes” to logical formulas directly.


5.4. The ring K̂0mot (VarF )Q . Here we define the ring of values of the arith-
metic motivic volume. The volume itself will be defined in the next subsec-
tion. This section is, essentially, quoted from [9, Section 1.3], with one
modification: the definition of the ring of values was greatly simplified by
Denef and Loeser in [6]. Hence, we are using the version of this ring that
appears in [6] rather than the original one.
18                              JULIA GORDON

   Let F be a field. Let us denote by MotF the category of Chow motives
over F , with coefficients in Q. The objects in MotF are, formally, equivalence
classes of triples (S, p, n), where S is a proper and smooth scheme over F ,
p is an idempotent correspondence on S with coefficients on Q [that is, an
algebraic cycle in S × S such that p2 ≃ p, where p2 is the product of p with
itself], and n ∈ Z. Some details about Chow motives can be found in [32].
   Even though Chow motives do not form an abelian category, they are
sufficiently suited for our purposes, because the category MotF is pseudo-
abelian, and therefore the notion of its Grothendieck group makes sense. We
denote this Grothendieck group by K0 (MotF ). This is the additive group of
equivalence classes of formal linear combinations of objects of MotF (with
the natural notion of equivalence so that if M = A⊕B then [M ] = [A]+[B]).
Since the category of Chow motives has a tensor product, K0 (MotF ) can
be given the structure of a ring. There is a natural inclusion of the set of
objects of the category MotF into its Grothendieck ring (each object can be
identified with its own equivalence class in K0 (MotF )).
   Let VarF be the category of algebraic varieties over F . For a smooth
projective variety S, there is a Chow motive canonically associated with it
– the triple (S, id, 0). There exists a unique embedding
                             χc : VarF → MotF
such that for smooth projective S, χc (S) = (S, id, 0).
Let L = (Spec F, id, −1) be the Lefschetz motive (see [32] for details). It is
the image, under the morphism χc , of the affine line A1 (note that the affine
line is not a projective variety, and this is the reason the integer component
of the Chow motive associated with it is not 0). The map χc induces the
morphism of Grothendieck rings [11], [13]:
                        χc : K0 (VarF ) → K0 (MotF ).
The object L is invertible (with respect to tensor product) in the category of
Chow motives. Hence, the map χc extends to the localization of K0 (VarF )
at [A1 ]. We denote by K0mot (VarF ) the image of this extended map χc .
Finally, set K0mot (VarF )Q = K0mot (VarF ) ⊗ Q.
    For more details of the definition of the ring of values of the arithmetic
motivic volume we refer to [9, Section 1.3] and [6, Section 6.3]. In the next
subsection, we describe the arithmetic motivic volume, which is a function
on logical formulas [rather, on definable subassignments as in [9]] taking
values, roughly, in this ring. More precisely, it is necessary to complete the
ring K0mot (VarF )Q with respect to a certain dimensional filtration in order
to have a meaningful “measure theory” with values in it. To define the
filtration of the ring of virtual Chow motives, we first define a filtration on
K0 (VarF )loc (where the subscript ‘loc’ stands for localization at [A1 ]). For
m ∈ Z, let F m K0 (VarF )loc be the subgroup of K0 (VarF ) generated by the
elements of the form [S]L−i with i − dim S ≥ m. This defines a decreasing
filtration F m . The image of this filtration under the map χc is a decreasing
                   MOTIVIC NATURE OF CHARACTER VALUES                            19

filtration on K0mot (VarF ), which naturally induces a filtration on the full ring
K0mot (VarF )Q . The completion of this ring with respect to this filtration is
denoted by K̂0mot (VarF )Q .
Remark 13. It is important to note that the volumes of all the objects that
we will be dealing with are contained in the image of the ring K0mot (VarF )Q
in K̂0mot (VarF )Q under the completion map, if we adjoin to it all the ele-
ments of the form [Li − 1]−1 for positive integers i (see [9, Remark 8.1.2]).
In fact, there is now new, yet unpublished, version of the theory of mo-
tivic integration (due to R. Cluckers and F. Loeser), which does not use
the completion at all. This new theory allows a refinement of our results,
namely, the virtual Chow motives responsible for the character values should
automatically lie in the ring K0mot (VarF )Q [Li − 1]i≥1 , rather than in a less
understood complete ring K̂0mot (VarF )Q .
    If v is a place of F , there is an action of F robv on the elements of
K̂0mot (VarF )Q that comes from the Frobenius action on the Chow motives.
The trace of the Frobenius operator on a Chow motive is the alternating
sum of the traces of Frobenius acting on its l-adic cohomology groups, and
it is an element of Q̄l (where l is a prime number), see [9, Section 3.3]. In all
the cases that we consider (following Denef and Loeser), this number turns
out to lie in Q (in particular, the choice of l doesn’t matter). It is the trace
of Frobenius action that allows to relate the values of the motivic measure,
that are elements of K̂0mot (VarF )Q , with the usual p-adic volumes, that are
rational numbers.
5.5. Arithmetic motivic integration. A beautiful very short description
of the theory of arithmetic motivic integration can be found in [17, Section
6.1].
   Let X be a smooth d-dimensional affine variety over F , where F is a
global field as above. Let φ be a logical formula in Pas’s language for the
field F ((t)) with m free variables ranging over the valued field sort and no
bound variables over the value sort. There is a natural notion of the formula
φ defining a subset of X : suppose that X is embedded in Am in some way.
Then we can assume that φ(x1 , . . . , xm ) is true only if x1 , . . . , xm satisfy
the polynomial equations defining X . In other words, this happens when
Z(φ, OFv ) ⊂ X (Fv ) for almost all places v of F , see [9, Proposition 5.2.1
and Section 8.3].
   In [6, Section 6.3] (following the original method of [9, Section 3]), Denef
and Loeser associate elements of the ring K0mot (V arF )Q to such formulas
φ. This mapping is additive in a natural sense (see [9, Proposition 3.4.4]).
This map is unique; it is denoted by χc (φ) in [9], but we will denote it by
µ(φ). This map eventually extends to the formulas that involve quantifiers.
In order to define this extension, the authors use the language of definable
subassignments of the functor of points of L(Am ). The resulting map on
subassignments is called arithmetic motivic volume, see [9, Section 6]. We
20                              JULIA GORDON

will not need the precise definition of the arithmetic motivic volume or the
language of subassignments. We only need its existence, finite additivity, and
the following two theorems. In the form that we state these theorems, they
are special cases of Theorems 8.3.1 and 8.3.2 [9], respectively, corresponding
to the case when the variety X is smooth and affine, and the definable
subassignment is defined by just one formula on the whole space, in the
terms of [9].
Theorem 14. [9, Theorem 8.3.1] Let F be a finite extension of Q with the
ring of integers O, and R = O[ N1 ], for some non zero integer N . Let X be
an affine variety over R, and let φ be a logical formula as above. Then there
exists a non zero multiple N ′ of N , such that, for every closed point v of
Spec O[ N1 ′ ],                   
                    Tr Frobv µ(φ) = volX ,Fv (Z(φ, OFv )).
   In the case when the local fields under consideration are of finite charac-
teristic, there is a slightly stronger result:
Theorem 15. [9, Theorem 8.3.2] Let F be a field of characteristic 0 which
is the field of fractions of a normal domain R of finite type over Z. Let X be
a variety over R, and let φ be a logical formula. Then there exists a nonzero
element f of R, such that, for every closed point x of Spec Rf , Z(φ, Fx [[t]])
is volFx [[t]] -measurable and
                                  
                     Tr Frobx µ(φ) = volX ,Fx [[t]] (Z(φ, Fx [[t]])).
  This completes our survey of arithmetic motivic integration. The next
two subsections are devoted to a summary of the facts from representation
theory that we are using.
5.6. Deligne-Lusztig representations of classical groups. Let G be
a connected reductive algebraic group defined over F̄, where F = Fq is a
finite field, q = pm . Deligne and Lusztig [4] constructed a large class of
representations of groups of the form GF in vector spaces over Q̄l with l 6= p.
By GF we denote the group of fixed points of G(F̄) under the Frobenius map
associated with q.
   These representations are parametrized by pairs (T, χ) where T is a max-
imal torus in GF defined over F and χ is an irreducible character of T . A
                                                                 GF .
representation corresponding to the pair (T, χ) is denoted by RT,χ
Definition 16. An irreducible representation of GF is called Deligne-Lusztig
                        GF for some (T, χ).
if it is equivalent to RT,χ
   In this paper we deal with representations of p-adic groups that are ob-
tained from Deligne-Lusztig representations by a certain natural procedure
described in Section 2.2. The reason we restrict our attention only to
Deligne-Lusztig representations is the fact that the values of their char-
acters at unipotent elements in GF are given by polynomials in q. We use
this fact in an essential way in the proof of our main result.
                  MOTIVIC NATURE OF CHARACTER VALUES                          21

    More specifically, if u is a unipotent element of GF , the value of the
                GF at u can be expressed as a sum of values of Green functions
character of RT,χ
QG T (u) (see, e.g., [36, Theorem 6.8]) (in particular, it does not depend on
χ). It was proved by B. Srinivasan in [37] that the values of QG     T (u) are
polynomials in q (the polynomial itself depends on the conjugacy class of u)
if G is symplectic or odd special orthogonal, and the characteristic p is odd
(since everything we do here is only up to a finite number of primes, this is
not a restriction).
5.7. Parametrization of unipotent conjugacy classes. Here we review
the parametrization of nilpotent orbits in the classical p-adic Lie algebras
given by Waldspurger [38]. We quote it from [38, Sections I.5, I.6]. It is
used in an essential way in the proof of Lemma 9.
   Let g be the Lie algebra sp(r) or so(r) with r odd, and let X ∈ g be a
nilpotent element. Denote by (V, qV ) the underlying vector space of g with
the quadratic form from the definition of g on it.
   Consider the set of all partitions Λ = (Λj ) of r with the following prop-
erties:
      • In the symplectic case, for all odd i ≥ 1, ci (Λ) is even
      • In the orthogonal case, for any even i ≥ 2, ci (Λ) is even
(here ci (Λ) is the number of Λj ’s that equal i).
   We can associate with X a partition Λ of r: for all integers i ≥ 1, ci (Λ)
is the number of Jordan blocks of X of length i in the natural matrix rep-
resentation. This partition automatically satisfies the above conditions.
   For all i ≥ 1, set Vi = ker(X i )/[ker(X i−1 ) + X ker(X i+1 )]. In the sym-
plectic (resp, orthogonal) case, define the quadratic form q̃i on ker(X i ), for
all even i (resp., odd), by:
                                          i−1
                     q̃i (v, v ′ ) = (−1)[ 2 ] qV (X i−1 (v), v ′ ).
Passing to a quotient, we get a non-degenerate form qi on Vi .
  In the orthogonal case, the forms qi satisfy the condition
                               M
                                   qi ∼a qV ,
                                   i odd
where ∼a indicates that the two forms have the same anisotropic kernel.
   The correspondence described above is a bijection between the set of
nilpotent orbits (under conjugation by elements of G) in g and the set of
pairs (Λ, (qi )) with Λ – a partition of r and (qi ) – a collection of quadratic
forms of dimensions ci (Λ) satisfying the conditions mentioned above.
   The same classification holds for finite fields. We also observe that over
a finite field Fq , an equivalence class of a quadratic form is determined by
its rank and discriminant in F∗q /F∗q 2 [33]. The nilpotent orbits in the Lie
algebra are in bijection with the unipotent conjugacy classes in the group,
when the characteristic p is large enough [20]. Explicitly, the bijection is
given by Cayley transform x 7→ (1 − x)(1 + x)−1 .
22                                  JULIA GORDON

  Let G be a simply connected algebraic group of symplectic or odd or-
thogonal type.
  Finally, we see that the unipotent conjugacy classes of GFq are in bijection
with the following data (cf. also [35, I 2.9] or [26, 11.1]):
     • a partition Λ of r with certain properties;
     • a representative (one of the two possible choices) of F∗q /F∗q 2 for each
       even (resp. odd) ci (Λ).

                                     References
 [1] C. Bushnell, G. Henniart, Local Tame Lifting for GL(N ) I: Simple Characters, Inst.
     Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math. 83 (1996), 105–233.
 [2] J. W. S. Cassels, Local Fields, Cambridge University Press, 1986.
 [3] A. Craw, An introduction to motivic integration, preprint
     http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/math.AG/9911179
 [4] P. Deligne, G. Lusztig, Representations of reductive groups over finite fields, Ann.
     Math. (2) 103 (1976) no. 1, 103 –161.
 [5] J. Denef p-adic semi-algebraic sets and cell decomposition, J. Reine Angew. Math.
     369 (1986),154–166.
 [6] J. Denef, F. Loeser On some rational generating series occuring in arithmetic geom-
     etry, preprint, http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/math.NT/0212202.
 [7] J. Denef, F. Loeser, Motivic integration, quotient singularities and the McKay corre-
     spondence, Compositio Math. 131 (2002), no. 3, 267–290.
 [8] J. Denef, F. Loeser,Germs of arcs on singular algebraic varieties and motivic integra-
     tion, Invent. Math. 135 (1999), no. 1, 201–232.
 [9] J. Denef, F. Loeser, Definable sets, motives, and p-adic integrals, J. Amer. Math.
     Soc., 14, (2001) no. 2, 429-469.
[10] H. B. Enderton, A mathematical introduction to logic. Second edition. Har-
     court/Academic Press, Burlington, MA, 2001.
[11] H. Gillet, C. Soulé, Descent, motives and K-theory, J. Reine Angew. Math. 478
     (1996), 127 – 176.
[12] J. Gordon, T.C. Hales, Virtual transfer factors, Represent. Theory 7 (2003), 81-100.
[13] F. Guillén, V. Navarro Aznar, Un critère d’extension d’un foncteur défini sur les
     schémas lisses, Publ. Math. Inst. Hautes Études Sci. 95 (2002), 1–91.
[14] M. Greenberg, Schemata over local rings, Ann. Math. 73 (1961), 634-648.
[15] T. C. Hales, Hyperelliptic curves and harmonic analysis (why harmonic analysis on
     reductive p-adic groups is not elementary), Contemporary Mathematics, 177 (1994),
     137–169.
[16] T. C. Hales, Can p-adic integrals be computed?, lecture at Conference on Automorphic
     Forms, IAS, April 2001.
[17] T. C. Hales, Can p-adic integrals be computed?, to appear in a volume dedicated to
     J. Shalika, http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/math.RT/0205207.
[18] T. C. Hales, Orbital integrals are motivic, preprint,
     http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/math.RT/0212236
[19] Harish-Chandra, The characters of reductive p-adic groups. Contributions to algebra
     (collection of papers dedicated to Ellis Kolchin), 175–182. Academic Press, New York,
     1977.
[20] J. Humphreys, Conjugacy Classes in Semisimple Algebraic Groups, Mathematical
     Surveys and Monographs, v. 43, 1995.
[21] N. Iwahori, H. Matsumoto, On some Bruhat decomposition and the structure of the
     Hecke rings of p-adic Chevalley groups. Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math. No. 25
     1965 5–48.
                      MOTIVIC NATURE OF CHARACTER VALUES                                    23

[22] D. Kazhdan, and G. Lusztig, Fixed Point Varieties on Affine Flag Manifolds, Appen-
     dix by J. Bernstein and D. Kazhdan, An example of a non-rational variety B̂N for
     G = Sp(6), Israel Journal of Math. 62:2 (1988), 129–168.
[23] M. Kontsevich, Lecture at Orsay, 1995.
[24] A.W. Knapp, Structure Theory of Semisimple Lie Groups, Proc. Symp. Pure Math.,
     61, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1997.
[25] E. Looijenga, Séminaire Bourbaki, Vol. 1999/2000. Astérisque No. 276 (2002), 267–
     297.
[26] G. Lusztig, Intersection cohomology on a reductive group, Invent. Math. 75 (1984),
     205 – 272.
[27] A. Moy, G. Prasad, Jacquet functors and unrefined minimal K-types, Comment. Math.
     Helv.(1) 71 (1996), 98 – 121.
[28] J. Oesterlé, Réduction modulo pn des sous-ensembles analytiques fermés de ZN    p , In-
     vent. Math., 66 (1982), 325 – 341.
[29] J. Pas, Uniform p-adic cell decomposition and local zeta functions, J. Reine Angew.
     math. 399 (1989), 137 – 172.
[30] M. Presburger, On the completeness of a certain system of arithmetic of whole num-
     bers in which addition occurs as the only operation. Translated from the German and
     with commentaries by Dale Jacquette. Hist. Philos. Logic 12 (1991), no. 2, 225–233.
     (the original: Über die Vollständigkeit eines gewissen Systems der arithmetik ganzer
     Zahlen, in welchem die Addition als einzige Operation hervortritt, Comptes-Rendus
     du Ier Congrès des Mathématiciens des Payes Slaves, Warsaw, 1929, 395, 99 – 101.)
[31] P.J. Sally, Jr. Some remarks on discrete series characters for reductive p-adic groups,
     Representations of Lie Groups, Kyoto, Hiroshima, 1986, 337 – 348, Adv. Stud. Pure
     Math. 14, Academic Press, Boston, 1988.
[32] A.Scholl,Classical motives, In Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics 55 Part
     1, 163–187 (1994).
[33] J.-P. Serre, A Course in Arithmetic. Graduate Texts in Mathematics, No. 7. Springer–
     Verlag, New York–Heidelberg, 1973.
[34] J.-P. Serre, Quelques applications du théorème de densité de Chebotarev, Inst. Hautes
     Études Sci. Publ. Math. 54 (1981), 323–401.
[35] N. Spaltenstein, Classes unipotentes et sous-groups de Borel, Lecture notes in Math-
     ematics, 946, Springer–Verlag, Berlin–New York, 1982.
[36] B. Srinivasan, Representations of finite Chevalley groups. A survey. Lecture Notes in
     Mathematics, 764. Springer–Verlag, Berlin–New York, 1979.
[37] B. Srinivasan, Green polynomials of finite classical groups, Comm. Algebra, 5 (1977),
     1241–1258.
[38] J.-L. Waldspurger, Intégrales orbitales nilpotentes et endoscopie pour les groupes
     classiques non ramifiés, Astérisque No. 269 (2001).
[39] J.-L. Waldspurger, Quelques questions sur les intégrales orbitales unipotentes et les
     algèbres de Hecke. Bull. Soc. Math. France 124 (1996), 1–34.

   Institute for Advanced Study, 1 Einstein Dr., Princeton NJ 08540, USA
   E-mail address: julygord@math.ias.edu
