                                              ON TENSOR CATEGORIES ATTACHED TO CELLS IN AFFINE
                                                              WEYL GROUPS II
arXiv:math/0102220v1 [math.RT] 28 Feb 2001




                                                                ROMAN BEZRUKAVNIKOV AND VIKTOR OSTRIK




                                                                                 1. Introduction
                                                Let R be a root system. Let W be the corresponding affine Weyl group, and let
                                             Ŵ be an extended affine Weyl group. Let H (respectively Ĥ) be the corresponding
                                             Hecke algebras. George Lusztig defined an asymptotic version of the Hecke
                                                                                                                    L algebra,
                                             the ring J, see [10]. By definition the ring J is a direct sum J =       c Jc where
                                             summation is over the set of two-sided cells in the affine Weyl group. Further,
                                             G. Lusztig proved that the set of two-sided cells in W is bijective to the set of
                                             unipotent conjugacy classes in an algebraic group over C with root system R,
                                             see [10] IV. Moreover, he proposed a Conjecture describing rings Jc in terms of
                                             convolution algebras, see [10] IV, 10.5 (a), (b). This Conjecture was verified in
                                             many cases by Nanhua Xi, see [16, 17, 18]. In this note we give a more conceptual
                                             proof of all previously known results. Our proof also works in some new cases. In
                                             general, we prove a statement (see Theorem 4 below) which is weaker than Lusztig’s
                                             Conjecture.
                                                The proof relies on many results of G.Lusztig in [10]. Our new essential tool is
                                             the theory of central sheaves on affine flag manifold due to A. Beilinson, D. Gaits-
                                             gory, R. Kottwitz, see [6]. One of us used this theory to prove a part of Lusztig’s
                                             Conjecture, see [4].
                                                We would like to thank George Lusztig for useful conversations.


                                                                                 2. Recollections
                                             2.1. Notations. Let G be an algebraic reductive connected group over the field of
                                             l−adic numbers Q̄l . Let X denote the weight lattice of G and let R ⊂ X denote the
                                             root system of G. Let Wf denote the Weyl group of G and let Ŵ be the extended
                                             Weyl group, that is the semidirect product of Wf and X. Let l : Ŵ → Z be the
                                             length function. Let W ⊂ Ŵ be the affine Weyl group, that is subgroup generated
                                             by Wf and R ⊂ X. Let S = {s ∈ W |l(s) = 1} be the set of simple reflections. It is
                                             well known that pair (W, S) is a Coxeter system.
                                                It is well known that any right Wf −coset in Ŵ contains unique shortest element.
                                             Let Ŵ f ⊂ Ŵ denote the subset of such representatives, so the set Ŵ f is in natural
                                             bijection with Ŵ /Wf .


                                                Date: February 2001.
                                                The first author was partially supported by an NSF grant; part of the work was done while he
                                             was employed by the Clay Institute.
                                                                                           1
2                  ROMAN BEZRUKAVNIKOV AND VIKTOR OSTRIK


2.2. Affine Hecke algebra. Let A = C[v, v −1 ]. The affine Hecke algebra Ĥ is a
free A−module with basis Hw (w ∈ Ŵ ) with an associative A−algebra structure
defined by Hw Hw′ = Hww′ if l(ww′ ) = l(w) + l(w′ ) and (Hs + v −1 )(Hs − v) = 0 if
s ∈ S. The algebra Ĥ is endowed with the Kazhdan-Lusztig basis Cw , w ∈ Ŵ , see
e.g. [10] IV 1.1. Let hx,y,z ∈ A be the structure constants of Ĥ with respect to this
basis, that is
                                         X
                                Cx Cy =      hx,y,z Cz .
                                          z∈W

   We say that (left, right or two-sided) ideal I ⊂ Ĥ is KL-ideal if it admits an
A−basis consisting of some elements Cx . For x, y ∈ Ŵ we write x ≤L y (resp. x ≤R
y, x ≤LR y) if left (resp. right, two-sided) KL-ideal generated by x is contained in
left (resp. right, two-sided) KL-ideal generated by y, cf. [9]. The relations ≤L , ≤R
, ≤LR are preorders. Let ∼L , ∼R , ∼LR be the associated equivalence relations. The
corresponding equivalence classes are called left, right and two-sided cells, see loc.
cit. Each two-sided cell is a union of left (resp. right) cells. The map w 7→ w−1
induces a bijection of the set of left cells to the set of right cells. This map induces
identity on the set of two-sided cells.
   A deep Theorem due to G. Lusztig (see [10] IV 4.8) states that the set of two-
sided cells is bijective to the set of unipotent orbits in G.

2.3. Asymptotic Hecke algebra J. There are well defined functions a : Ŵ →
N, γ : Ŵ × Ŵ × Ŵ → N such that
                   v a(z) hx,y,z − γx,y,z−1 ∈ vZ[v] for all x, y, z ∈ Ŵ
and such that for any z ∈ Ŵ there exist x, y ∈ Ŵ with γx,y,z 6= 0. The function a
is constant on two-sided cells, see [10] I 5.4.
    Let J be a free Z−module with basis tx ,P   x ∈ Ŵ . It has a unique structure of
an associativePZ−algebra such that tx ty = z∈Ŵ γx,y,z tz−1 , see [10] II. It has a
unit element t∈D td where the summation is over the set D ⊂ W of distinguished
involutions, see loc. cit. Each left (resp. right) cell contains exactly one element of
D. For any two-sided cell c let Jc ⊂ J be the Z−submodule generated by tx , x ∈ c.
                                                                              ′
The submodule  LJc is in fact a subalgebra; moreover Jc · Jc = 0 for c 6= c , see [10]
                                                               ′

II, hence J = c Jc .
    We will use many times the following characterization of cells due to G. Lusztig:
w ∼L w′ if and only if tw tw′−1 6= 0, see [11] 3.1 (k).
    Algebras Jc are examples of based algebras, that is algebras over Z endowed
with a basis over Z such that the structure constants in this basis are nonnegative
integers. Another example of a based algebra can be constructed as follows: let F
be a reductive algebraic group acting on the finite set X; then the Grothendieck
group KF (X × X) of the category of F −equivariant coherent sheaves on X × X
is a based algebra with the basis given by classes of irreducible F −bundles and
multiplication given by convolution, see [10] IV 10.2.
    Assume for a moment that group G is simply connected. For any two-sided cell
c let uc be the unipotent element in G corresponding to c under Lusztig’s bijection
[10] IV 4.8. Let Fc be the Levi factor of the centralizer ZG (uc ) of uc in G. In [10]
IV 10.5 G. Lusztig conjectured that there exists a finite set X endowed with an
action of Fc such that the based algebras Jc and KFc (X × X) are isomorphic as
based algebras, that is the isomorphism respects bases. The aim of this note is to
     ON TENSOR CATEGORIES ATTACHED TO CELLS IN AFFINE WEYL GROUPS II                     3


prove a weak form of this Conjecture; more precisely, we replace finite Fc −set by
a somewhat more general object — finite Fc −set of centrally extended points, see
below.

2.4. We will need the following well known
   Lemma. Let Γ1 and Γ2 be two left cells lying in the same two-sided cell. Then
the intersection Γ1 ∩ (Γ2 )−1 is non empty.
   Proof. Let w ∈ Γ1 and w′ ∈ Γ−1                              ′
                                    2 . By [11] 3.1 (l) w ∼LR w if and only if there
exists y ∈ Ŵ such that tw ty tw′ 6= 0. We see from the characterization of left cells
                                     −1
above that w ∼L y −1 and y ∼L w′ . Thus y −1 ∈ Γ1 ∩ Γ−1    2 . 


                                   3. Affine flags
                        L
3.1. Notations. Let G be a split reductive algebraic group over Z which is Lang-
lands dual to G. To L G one associates the following “loop objects” defined over Z:
the (inifinite type) group schemes KZ of maps from a formal disc to L G, and the
Iwahori group IZ of maps whose value at the origin lies in a fixed Borel; and ind-
schemes FlZ (the affine flag variety), and GrZ (the affine Grassmanian). For a field
k we have K(k) = L G(O), I(k) = I, Gr(k) = L G(F )/L G(O) and Fl(k) = L G(F )/I
where F = k((t)), O = k[[t]], and I ⊂ L G(O) is an Iwahori subgroup.
    We fix a field k which is either Fp or complex numbers; we change scalars from
Z to k (and drop the subscript Z). By the (derived) category of sheaves we will
mean either the (derived) category of l-adic sheaves, l 6= char(k), or the (derived)
category of constructible sheaves on the complex variety for k = C. We will denote
Ql by C in the first case.
    The orbits of I on Fl, Gr are finite dimensional and isomorphic to affine spaces;
it is well known that orbits (called Schubert cells) are labelled by elements of Ŵ for
Fl and Ŵ /Wf for Gr. For w ∈ Ŵ (respectively w ∈ Ŵ /Wf ) let Flw , Grw be the
corresponding Schubert cells.
    Let DI be the I−equivariant derived category of sheaves on Fl, and let P I ⊂ DI
be the full subcategory of perverse sheaves. The convolution product defines a
functor ∗ : DI × DI → DI ; moreover, ∗ is equipped with a natural associativity
constraint (cf. e.g. [7], §1.1.2-1.1.3, or [3], §7.6.1, p. 260).
    Let jw : Flw → Fl be the natural inclusion and let Lw = jw!∗ (Ql [dim Flw ]),
where Ql is the constant sheaf. Simple objects in P I are exhausted by Lw , w ∈ Ŵ .
    Remark. Following the standard yoga one can consider the “graded” versions
      I      I
of Dmix  , Pmix  of DI , P I ; here Dmix
                                     I       I
                                         , Pmix  are subcategories in the derived category
of mixed l-adic sheaves if k is of finite characteristic, and they are objects of the
                                                                                       I
(derived) category of mixed Hodge D-modules if k = C. The convolution on Dmix
                               I
is defined. It provides Dmix with the structure of a monoidal category, and thus
                                           I
equips the Grothendieck group K(Dmix           ) with an algebra structure; this algebra is
isomorphic to H.
    We will not use this theory below; however, it underlies the relation between
the categories considered in this note and affine Hecke algebras. Also, since the set
of representations of an affine Hecke algebra injects into the set of representations
of the corresponding p-adic group L G (Fq ((t))), appearance of the Langlands dual
group in the statements below is a manifestation of the geometric Langlands duality.
    Notice also that mixed sheaves are used in [4] (in the proof of Theorem 2); the
results of this note are based on those of [4].
4                    ROMAN BEZRUKAVNIKOV AND VIKTOR OSTRIK


3.2. Central sheaves. Recall the following definition, see e.g. [8]
   Definition. Let A be a monoidal category, and B be a tensor (symmetric
monoidal) category. A central functor from B to A is a monoidal functor F : B → A
together with a functorial isomorphism
                             σX,Y : F (X) ⊗ Y ∼
                                              = Y ⊗ F (X)
fixed for all X ∈ B, Y ∈ A subject to the following compatibilities:
   (i) For X, X ′ ∈ B the isomorphism σX,F (X ′ ) coincides with the isomorphism
induced by commutativity constraint in B.
   (ii) For Y1 , Y2 ∈ A and X ∈ B the composition
                            σX,Y1 ⊗id                     id⊗σX,Y2
          F (X) ⊗ Y1 ⊗ Y2     −→        Y1 ⊗ F (X) ⊗ Y2     −→       Y1 ⊗ Y2 ⊗ F (X)
coincides with σX,Y1 ⊗Y2 .
   (iii) For Y ∈ A and X1 , X2 ∈ B the composition
                                                id⊗σX2 ,Y                           σX1 ,Y ⊗id
    F (X1 ⊗ X2 ) ⊗ Y ∼
                     = F (X1 ) ⊗ F (X2 ) ⊗ Y       −→       F (X1 ) ⊗ Y ⊗ F (X2 )      −→

                       Y ⊗ F (X1 ) ⊗ F (X2 ) ∼
                                             = Y ⊗ F (X1 ⊗ X2 )
coincides with σX1 ⊗X2 ,Y .
   Let PGr be the category of K− equivariant perverse sheaves on Gr. The con-
volution endows PGr with monoidal structure and this structure naturally extends
to a structure of a commutative rigid tensor category with a fiber functor, and this
category is equivalent to Rep(G), see [6, 14]; [3], §5.3, pp 199–215. We will identify
Rep(G) with PGr .
    In [6] a functor Z : Rep(G) = PGr → P I (Fl) was constructed. It enjoys the
following properties:
    (i) We have a natural isomorphism of functors π∗ ◦ Z ∼   = id, where π : Fl → Gr
is the projection.
    (ii) For F ∈ PGr , G ∈ P I we have G ∗ Z(F ) ∈ P I .
    (iii) Z is endowed with a natural structure of a central functor from the tensor
category PGr to the monoidal category DI .
    (iv) A unipotent automorphism (monodromy) M of the tensor functor Z is given;
centrality isomorphism from (iii) commutes with M.

3.3. Monoidal category Ac . For a subset S ⊂ W let PSI denote the Serre sub-
                                                             S
category of P I with simple objects Lw , w ∈ S. Let Ŵ≤c = c′ ≤LR c c′ and
        S                           I
Ŵ<c = c′ <LR c c′ . We abbreviate P≤c     I
                                        = PŴ and P<c = PŴ<c . Let PcI de-
                                                     ≤c
                                      I    I
note the Serre quotient category P≤c     /P<c .
   For any object X ∈ D and integer i let H i (X) ∈ P I denote i−th perverse
                            I

cohomology. For any X, Y ∈ PcI let us define truncated convolution X • Y ∈ PcI
by X • Y = H a(c) (X ∗ Y ) mod P<c      I
                                          . Let Mc be the full subcategory of PcI
consisting of semisimple objects. It follows from the Decomposition Theorem [2]
that the functor • preserves category Mc . The fact the convolution of pure perverse
sheaves is pure implies (see [12], 2.6) that the Grothendieck group K(Mc ) with the
multiplication induced by • is isomorphic to the algebra     L Jc . In [12] a natural
associativity constraint was constructed for •. Let Ic = d∈c∩D Ld ∈ Mc (recall
that D is the set of distinguished involutions). It is clear that Ic • X ≃ X • Ic ≃ X
for any X ∈ Mc . Thus a choice of an isomorphism Ic • Ic → Ic defines a structure
     ON TENSOR CATEGORIES ATTACHED TO CELLS IN AFFINE WEYL GROUPS II                    5


of a monoidal category on Mc , see [12]. We will fix such a choice for the rest of
this paper.
   Let Ac be the full subcategory of PcI consisting of all subquotients of Lw ∗ Z(F )
        I
mod P<c     where w ∈ c and F ∈ PGr . The following Proposition is proved in [4],
Proposition 2.
   Proposition. Restriction of • to Ac takes values in Ac , is exact in each variable,
and it equips Ac with a structure of a monoidal category with unit object Ic .
   It is clear from the definitions that Lusztig’s category Mc is a monoidal subcat-
egory of Ac consisting of semisimple objects in Ac .

3.4. Some results from [4]. Let d ∈ c be a Duflo involution. Let Ad ⊂ Ac be
the full subcategory consisting of all subquotients of Ld ∗ Z(F ), F ∈ PGr . This
category is endowed with a functor Resd : Rep(G) → Ad defined by Resd (F ) =
                     I
Ld ∗ Z(F ) mod P<c      . The functor Resd has natural automorphism Md induced
by the automorphism M of monodromy. The following Theorem is proved in [4]
Theorems 1 and 2:
   Theorem. (a) The category Ad has a natural structure of a tensor category with
unit object Ld , functor Resd has a natural structure of a tensor functor and Md is
an automorphism of the tensor functor Resd .
   (b) Moreover, there exists a subgroup Hd ⊂ G, a unipotent element Nd ∈ G
commuting with Hd , an equivalence of tensor categories Φd : Rep(Hd ) → Ad , and a
natural transformation of functors ResG    Hd ≃ Φd ◦ Resd which interwines the tensor
automorphism Md with the action of Nd . The pair (Hd , Nd ) is unique up to a
simultaneous conjugacy. The element Nd is conjugate to uc .
   It is proved in [13] that the intersection c∩ Ŵ f consists of a unique canonical left
cell which we will denote Γc (recall that Ŵ f is a set of shortest representatives of
right Wf −cosets in Ŵ ). In particular, there exists a unique distinguished involution
d = df ∈ c ∩ Ŵ f . We call df a canonical distinguished involution.
   Theorem. (see [4] Theorem 3) (a) The set of irreducible objects of Adf is
{Lw |w ∈ Γc ∩ (Γc )−1 }.
   (b) The subgroup Hdf contains a maximal reductive subgroup of the centralizer
ZG (uc ).

3.5. Central action of Rep(Fc ). Consider the functor F̃ : Rep(G) = PGr → Ac
                                        I
defined by F̃ (F ) = Z(F )∗Ic mod P<c     . It is easy to see from 3.2 that the functor F̃
has a natural structure of a central functor. Moreover, this functor has a canonical
tensor unipotent automorphism M (monodromy) commuting with the centrality
isomorphism.
   Theorem 1. There exists a central functor F : Rep(ZG(uc )) → Ac such that
F̃ = F ◦ ResG  ZG (uc ) . Moreover, automorphism M is induced by the action of uc on
ResGZG (uc ) .
   Proof. Let D(Ac ) denote the Drinfeld double of the monoidal category Ac , see
e. g. [8]. By the universal property of double the functor F̃ can be factorized as
                                              F̃         // Ac
                            Rep(G)
                                 JJ
                                   JJ F̃0              xx<<
                                     JJ              xx
                                        JJ
                                          J$$     xxx
                                                 x
                                           D(Ac )
6                   ROMAN BEZRUKAVNIKOV AND VIKTOR OSTRIK


where F̃0 is again a central functor. Recall that the unit object of D(Ac ) is Ic
endowed with the centrality isomorphism induced by the unity isomorphisms:
                                 Ic • X ∼
                                        =X∼
                                          = X • Ic .
We remark that Ic considered as an object of D(Ac ) is irreducible: it is easy to
see from Lemma 2.4 that any subobject of Ic in Ac does not lie in the center of
Ac even on the level of K−theory. Now consider the full subcategory D̃ ⊂ D(Ac )
consisting of all subquotients of objects F̃0 (X), X ∈ Rep(G). Then the conditions
of Proposition 1 [4] are satisfied for the pair (D̃, F̃0 ). Consequently, the functor F̃0
factors through the restriction functor ResG H

                                               F̃0
                            Rep(G)                         //
                                 KKK      G               x<< D̃
                                    KKRes
                                      KKK H         F0 xx
                                                         x
                                                       x
                                         KK         xxx
                                            %%     x
                                          Rep(H)

for some subgroup H ⊂ G and the action of M is given by some unipotent element
u ∈ ZG (H). Theorem 2 of [4] identifies u with uc . Hence the subgroup H is
contained in ZG (uc ). Without loss of generality we can assume that H = ZG (uc ).
We set the functor F to be equal to the composition
                                       0 F
                        Rep(ZG (uc )) −→ D̃ → D(Ac ) → Ac .
The Theorem is proved. 
   Let us restrict F to the semisimple part of the category Rep(ZG (uc )), that is to
the category Rep(Fc ) where Fc is the maximal reductive factor of ZG (uc ).
   Proposition. For any X ∈ Rep(Fc ) the object F (X) ∈ Ac is semisimple.
   Proof. We can assume that X is simple. Let Y ∈ Rep(G) be an object such that
X is a subquotient of ResGFc (Y ). The object F̃ (Y ) carries the monodromy filtration;
by Gabber’s Theorem (see [1], Theorem 5.1.2) it coincides with the weight filtration,
so the associated graded object grF̃ (Y ) is semisimple by [2], 5.4.6. By the Theorem
1 we get the same filtration from the action of uc on F (ResG   ZG (uc ) ). But the object
                                   G
X is a direct summand of gr ResZG (uc ) (Y ) with respect to this filtration. 
   As a corollary we get
   Theorem 2. The functor F restricts to a central functor F : Rep(Fc ) → Mc .

                                 4. Canonical cell
4.1. Module categories. In this subsection we review basic theory of module
categories. A more detailed exposition will appear in [15]. We will work over a
fixed field k.
   Let C be an abelian monoidal category with biexact tensor product and with
unit object 1.
   Definition. A module category M over C is an abelian category M endowed
with
   1) An exact bifunctor ⊗ : Rep(H) × C → C,
   2) Functorial associativity isomorphisms V ⊗ (V ′ ⊗ M ) ≃ (V ⊗ V ′ ) ⊗ M for any
V, V ′ ∈ C, M ∈ M,
   3) Functorial unit isomorphisms 1 ⊗ M → M for any M ∈ M
    ON TENSOR CATEGORIES ATTACHED TO CELLS IN AFFINE WEYL GROUPS II                    7


   subject to the usual pentagon and triangle axioms: the following diagrams where
all arrows are associativity and unit isomorphisms commute:


                                 ((V1 ⊗ V2 ) ⊗ V3 ) ⊗ M
                                                   UUUU
                              iii iiii                 UUUU
                          iiii                             UUUU
                       iii                                     UUUU
                   ttii                                            **
  (V1 ⊗ (V2 ⊗ V3 )) ⊗ M                                       (V1 ⊗ V2 ) ⊗ (V3 ⊗ M )

                                                                       
  V1 ⊗ ((V2 ⊗ V3 ) ⊗ M )                                    // V1 ⊗ (V2 ⊗ (V3 ⊗ M ))

                  (V ⊗ 1) ⊗ M                     // V ⊗ (1 ⊗ M )
                           NNN                         p
                              NNN
                                 NNN            ppppp
                                    NN''      pp
                                         wwppp
                                     V ⊗M
The notions of module functors, and, in particular, equivalences of module cate-
gories is defined in the obvious way.
   Remark. Module categories over general monoidal categories were considered
by L. Crane and I. Frenkel, see [5]. The name comes from considering the notion of
a monoidal category as categorification of the notion of a ring. Module categories
seem to be of importance in Conformal Field Theory where they are implicitly
considered in the context of Boundary Conformal Field Theory.
   Of course the category C is a module category over itself with associativity and
unit isomorphisms induced by ones in tensor category C. Another example can
be obtained as follows. Let A ∈ C be an associative algebra with unit, that is
associative multiplication A ⊗ A → A is defined and there is an inclusion 1 → A
satisfying unit axioms. Then category M odC (A) of right A−modules in the category
C has an obvious structure of a module category.
   We will say that a module category M is generated by objects M1 , M2 , . . . ∈ M
over C if any object of M is a subquotient of V ⊗ Mi for some V ∈ C. We will say
that M is finitely generated over C if there exists finitely many (equivalently one)
objects M1 , . . . ∈ M such that M is generated by them over C.
   Assume from now on that the category C is rigid. Then there exists a canonical
isomorphism Hom(V ⊗ M, N ) ∼     = Hom(M, V ∗ ⊗ N ) for any V ∈ C, M, N ∈ M.
   Now assume that both categories C and M are semisimple. For any two objects
M, N ∈ M the functor C → V eck , V 7→ Hom(V ⊗ M, N ) is representable by an
ind-object Hom(M, N ) of C. By Yoneda’s Lemma Hom is a bifunctor Mop × M →
ind-objects of C.
   Lemma. Assume that ω : M → C is an exact faithful tensor functor. Then for
any M, N ∈ M Hom(M, N ) ∈ C.
   Proof. It is clear that the map Hom(M, N ) → Hom(ω(M ), ω(N )) is an imbed-
ding. 
   Assume that for any M, N ∈ M the ind-object Hom(M, N ) is an object of C.
For any three objects M, N, K ∈ M a functorial and associative multiplication
Hom(N, K) ⊗ Hom(M, N ) → Hom(M, K) is defined (note that the order of factors
is opposite to the intuitive one). In particular, for any object M ∈ C the object
Hom(M, M ) has a natural structure of an associative algebra in C. Assume that
8                  ROMAN BEZRUKAVNIKOV AND VIKTOR OSTRIK


Hom(M, X) 6= 0 for any X ∈ M, that is the category M is generated by M over
C. It is easy to see that the functor FM : M → M odC (A), FM (X) = Hom(M, X)
is a tensor functor. Moreover, we claim that this functor is an equivalence of
categories. The proof is straightforward: first one shows that the functor FM
induces an isomorphism on Hom’s for objects of the form V ⊗ M, V ∈ C, and then
one uses the fact that any object of M admits a resolution by objects of the form
V ⊗ M . Summarizing we get the following
   Proposition. Let C be a semisimple rigid monoidal category and let M be a
semisimple module category over C. Assume that there exists an exact faithful mod-
ule functor ω : M → C. Then the category M is equivalent to the category M odC (A)
for some associative algebra A. Moreover one can choose A = Hom(M, M ) for any
object M ∈ C generating M over C.
   Let M = M odC (A) be a module category. Consider the category F un(M, M)
consisting of module functors M → M. It is clear that the category F un(M, M)
is a monoidal category with tensor product induced by the composition of functors
and identity functor as unit object. One shows easily that the monoidal category
F un(M, M) is equivalent to the category of A − A bimodules in C with the obvious
monoidal structure.


4.2. Module categories over Rep(H). In this subsection we specialize ourselves
to the case when C = Rep(H) for some reductive group H over an algebraically
closed field k of characteristic zero.
    Examples. (i) Rep(H) with the associativity and unit isomorphisms induced
from those in the monoidal category Rep(H) is of course a module category over
Rep(H).
    (ii) More generally, let X be a variety endowed with an H−action. The category
CohH (X) of coherent H−equivariant sheaves on X is a module category. We get
example (i) by letting X =point.
    (iii) Let 1 → Gm → H̃ → H → 1 be a central extension of H whose kernel is
identified with the multiplicative group Gm (we will call such a data just “a central
extension”); of course, such an extension is necessarily the pushforward if a central
extension 1 → C → H̃ ′ → H → 1 under a homomorphism C → Gm for a finite
cyclic group C. Then the category Rep1 (H̃) of representations V of H̃ such that
Gm acts on V via identity character is a module category over Rep(H). We will
also consider the category Rep−1 (H̃) of representations of H̃ on which Gm acts via
character x 7→ x−1 .
    We will say that a module category C has a quasifiber functor if there exists
a faithful exact module functor ω : C → Rep(H). The quasifiber functor if it
exists is not unique: for any V ∈ Rep(H) and quasifiber functor ω the functor
M 7→ ω(M ) ⊗ V is again a quasifiber functor.
    Example. (iv) Let H ′ ⊂ H be a subgroup of finite index. Let 1 → Gm →
H̃ → H ′ → 1 be a central extension. The category Rep1 (H̃ ′ ) is a module category
  ′

over Rep(H) with the Rep(H)−action which factors through the restriction functor
Rep(H) → Rep(H ′ ). Let V0 ∈ Rep−1 (H̃ ′ ) be a fixed object. It is easy to see that
                                               1
the functor V 7→ IndH                             ′
                        H ′ (V ⊗ V0 ), V ∈ Rep (H̃ ) is a quasifiber functor (Gm acts
trivially on V ⊗ V0 so V ⊗ V0 can be considered as a representation of H ′ ).
    Example (iv) reduces to the example (i) with X = H/H ′ if the central extension
splits.
    ON TENSOR CATEGORIES ATTACHED TO CELLS IN AFFINE WEYL GROUPS II               9


   Example. (iv′ ) Finite sums of categories considered in Example (iv) admit the
following invariant description.
   A finite H-set of centrally extended points is the following collection of data:
   (a) A finite set X with an H action;
   (b) For any x ∈ X a central extension Gm → H̃(x) → H(x) of the stabilizer
H(x) = StabH (x). These should be equivariant under the action of H, i.e. for every
g ∈ G an isomorphism of igx : H̃(x)g−→H̃(gx) identical on Gm and covering the map
Cg : H(x) → H(g(x)) (conjugation by x) should be given. ixg should coincide with
                                                                 g (x)
the conjugation by g when g ∈ H(x) and should satisfy ixg1 g2 = ig12 ◦ ixg2 .
   Let X be a finite set of centrally extended points. An equivariant sheaf on X is
a sheaf F of finite dimensional C-vector spaces on the underlying set X together
with
   (a) a projective H-equivariant structure on F .
   (b) For every x ∈ X an action of H̃(x) on the stalk Fx , comprising an object of
Rep1 (H̃(x)).
   The data (a) and (b) should be compatible, i.e. (b) should be H-equivariant, and
the projective action of H(x) arising from (b) must coincide with the one arising
from (a).
   Equivariant sheaves on X obviously form a category, which we denote by CohH (X).
   Choosing a set of representatives xi for H-orbits on X we see that the data of a
centrally extended set with underlying equivariant set X is equivalent to a collection
H̃i of central extensions Gm → H̃i → Hi = H(xi ). The category CohH (X) is then
canonically equivalent to the direct sum ⊕i Rep1 (H̃i ).
   Theorem 3. Let M be a semisimple module category over Rep(H) finitely
generated over Rep(H). Assume that M admits a quasifiber functor. Then M is
equivalent to CohH (X) for some centrally extended finite H-set X (i.e. to a finite
direct sum of some categories of the type described in Example (iv) above).
   Proof. By Proposition 4.1 the module category M is equivalent to the module
category M odRep(H) (A) for some finite dimensional H−algebra A.
   Lemma. Semisimplicity of M implies semisimplicity of A as an algebra in the
category of vector spaces.
   Proof. Consider the regular representation Areg of A as an object of M odRep(H) (A).
Let r(A) be the Jacobson radical of A. It is clear that r(A) is H−invariant, hence
r(A) is subobject of Areg in M odRep(H) (A). Suppose Areg = r(A) ⊕ A1 for some
A1 ∈ M odRep(H) (A). Applying the forgetful functor M odRep(H) (A) → M od(A) to
Areg we would get a P complement to r(A), which is impossible unless r(A) = 0. 
   Now let A ∋ 1 =       ei is the decomposition of 1 in the sum of minimal central
orthogonal idempotents. The group H acts on the set {ei }. We may assume
that this action is transitive. Let H1 ⊂ H be the stabilizer of e1 , the subgroup
of finite index in H. The algebra e1 Ae1 is isomorphic to the matrix algebra and
the group H1 acts on e1 Ae1 . We can choose a projective representation V of H1
and an isomorphism e1 Ae1 ∼     = End(V ). It is clear that A ∼ = IndH  H1 (e1 Ae1 ) =
     H
IndH1 End(V ).
   The projective action of H1 on V comes from an action of a central extension
H̃1 of H1 . Let us consider the corresponding category from example (iv) Rep1 (H̃1 ).
The representation V can be viewed as an object of this category and one easily
calculates Hom(V, V ) = IndH   H1 End(V ). The Theorem is proved. 
10                  ROMAN BEZRUKAVNIKOV AND VIKTOR OSTRIK


4.3. Module category corresponding to the canonical cell. For any sub-
set S ⊂ c let MS ⊂ Mc denote the full Serre subcategory with simple objects
Lw , w ∈ S. Let Γ ⊂ c be the canonical right cell, see [13]. Let MΓ ⊂ Mc be the
corresponding subcategory. By the definition of a right cell we have MΓ • Mc ⊂
MΓ . Define on MΓ a structure of a module category over Rep(Fc ) by the formula
V ⊗ M = F (V ) • M where F is a functor from Theorem 2. Note that due to the
centrality of functor F we have F (Rep(Fc )) • MΓ = MΓ • F (Rep(Fc )) ⊂ MΓ so
this is well defined. We claim that this category admits a quasifiber functor. In-
deed, let {w1 , w2 , . . . } ⊂ Γ−1 be a set of representatives of all right cells contained
in c (such a set exists by the Lemma 2.4 and is finite since Lusztig proved (see
[10] II 2.2) that the number of cells in an affine Weyl group is finite). Consider
the functor MΓ → MΓ∩Γ−1 , X 7→ X • (⊕Lwi ). Recall that in [4] the monoidal
category MΓ∩Γ−1 was identified with Rep(Fc ), see 3.4. It is a simple exercise to
check that this functor is module functor with the module structure induced by the
associativity isomorphism in Mc , and it is clear that it is exact and faithful. So
this is quasifiber functor, and we can apply Theorem 3. We get
   Proposition. The category MΓ as a module category over Rep(Fc ) is equivalent
to the category CohFc (X) of coherent sheaves on a finite Fc −set X of possibly
centrally extended points.
   Note that the inclusion MΓ∩Γ−1 ⊂ MΓ gives us a distinguished point 0 ∈ X
which is just a usual (not centrally extended) point fixed by the Fc −action.



                             5. Square of a finite set
5.1. Monoidal category F unFc (X, X). Consider the category F unFc (X, X) con-
sisting of all module functors CohFc (X) → CohFc (X). It is a monoidal category
with the tensor product induced by the composition of functors and unit object
equal to the identity functor. Since the category CohFc (X) is semisimple, any
functor F ∈ F unFc (X, X) has left and right adjoint functors F ∗ and ∗ F . Observe
that adjoint of tensor functor has a natural structure of a module functor and hence
F ∗ , ∗ F ∈ F unFc (X, X). Standard properties of adjoint functors show that F ∗ and
∗
  F are right and left duals of F in the monoidal category F unFc (X, X). So the
category F unFc (X, X) is rigid.
   Lemma. The category F unFc (X, X) is semisimple.
   Proof. Let us choose an Fc −algebra A and an equivalence CohFc (X) →
M odRep(Fc (A). Then the category F unFc (X, X) is equivalent to the category of
A − A bimodules in Rep(Fc ), or to the category of A ⊗ Aop −modules in Rep(Fc )
where Aop is A with the opposite multiplication. The latter category is clearly
semisimple since A ⊗ Aop is a semisimple algebra. 
   Note that in semisimple monoidal category left and right duals coincide, so in
the future we will not distinguish left and right duals.
   Remark. For an H-set X it is easy to construct an equivalence F unH (X, X) ∼     =
CohH (X × X). Let us spell out a generalization of this statement to centrally
extended H-sets.
   Recall that for two central extensions 1 → Gm → H̃i → H → 1, i = 1, 2 their
product is defined by H̃12 = H̃1 ×H H̃2 /Gm , where Gm is embedded antidiagonally;
also for a central extension H̃ the opposite central extension H̃ ′ is the same group
with the same homomorphism to H but with the identification of its kernel with
    ON TENSOR CATEGORIES ATTACHED TO CELLS IN AFFINE WEYL GROUPS II              11


Gm replaced by the opposite one (composition of the original one with the map
x 7→ x−1 ).
   Now for two centrally extended H-sets X, Y one can define their product in
the obvious manner: the underlying equivariant set is X × Y , where X, Y are
equivariant sets underlying X and Y; the central extension H̃(x, y) is the product
of restrictions of H̃(x) and of H̃(y) to H(x, y). For a centrally extended H-set
X we obtain the opposite centrally extended set X′ replacing each of the central
extensions Gm → H̃(x) → H(x) by the opposite one.
   If X, Y, Z are centrally extended H-sets with underlying H-sets X, Y, Z, then
for F ∈ CohH (X × Y ′ ), G ∈ CohH (Y × Z) the sheaf F ⊠ C ⊗ C ⊗ G on X × Y × Z
carries a natural structure of an equivariant sheaf on X × Y0 × Z (here Y0 is Y
equipped with the trivial
                      N (split) centrally extended structure). Thus the convolution
F ∗ G = pr13∗ (F ⊠ C C ⊠ G) (where pr13 : X × Y × Z → X × Z is the projection)
carries the structure of an equivariant sheaf on X×Z. In particular, for X = Y = Z
we get a monoidal structure on CohH (X × X′ ); and for X = Y, and Z being the
point with the split central extension we get a monoidal functor of CohH (X×X′ ) →
F unH (X). It is easy to see that this functor is an equivalence.

5.2. Monoidal functor G. We have a monoidal functor G : Mop    c → F unFc (X, X),
G(X) =? • X where Mop    c is Mc with the opposite tensor product. It is clear that
G is exact and faithful.
   The main result of this section is the following
   Theorem 4. The functor G is a tensor equivalence Mop   c → F unFc (X, X).
   Corollary. Suppose that any subgroup of finite index in Fc has no nontrivial
projective representations. Then Lusztig’s Conjecture holds for the cell c.

5.3. A result of G. Lusztig. The following result cited from [10] II Proposition
1.4 is cruicial for the proof of Theorem 4.
   Proposition. (a) Assume that Lx • Ly , x, y ∈ c contains as a direct summand
Ld , d ∈ D. Then x = y −1 and the multiplicity of Ld in Lx • Ly is one.
   (b) For any x ∈ c the truncated convolution Lx • Lx−1 contains Ld for a uniquely
defined d ∈ D ∩ c.

5.4. Proof of the Theorem 4. Since the category F unFc (X, X) is semisimple it
is enough to prove the following statements:
   (i) Any functor from F unFc (X, X) appears as a direct summand of G(L), L ∈
Mopc .
   (ii) For any w ∈ c the functor G(Lw ) is irreducible.
   (iii) For w, w′ ∈ c an isomorphism G(Lw ) = G(Lw′ ) implies w = w′ .

5.4.1. We begin with the following
   Lemma. (a) For any w ∈ Γ the functor G(Lw ) is irreducible. Moreover G
induces an equivalence MΓ → { module functors Rep(Fc ) → MΓ } .
   (b) For any w ∈ Γ−1 the functor G(Lw ) is irreducible. Moreover, G induces an
equivalence MΓ−1 → { module functors MΓ → Rep(Fc )} .
   Proof. (a) It is clear that Lv • Lw = 0 for any w ∈ Γ, v ∈ Γ − Γ ∩ Γ−1 . So
the functor G(Lw ) can be considered as a functor Rep(Fc ) = MΓ∩Γ−1 → MΓ . For
any module category M over Rep(Fc ) the map f 7→ f (1) defines an equivalence of
categories F unRep(Fc ) (Rep(Fc ), M) → M. In our case G(Lw )(1) = Ldf • Lw = Lw
and (a) is proved.
12                   ROMAN BEZRUKAVNIKOV AND VIKTOR OSTRIK


     (b) Let us first check that for w ∈ Γ−1 we have
                                   G(Lw )∗ ∼
                                           = G(Lw−1 ),                          (∗)
where G(Lw )∗ is the functor adjoint to G(Lw ).
   For w ∈ Γ−1 the functor G(Lw ) maps MΓ to MΓ∩Γ−1 = Rep(Fc ) ⊂ MΓ . Thus
G(Lw )∗ sends Lv to zero unless v ∈ Γ ∩ Γ−1 ; hence part (a) of the Lemma implies
that G(Lw )∗ is isomorphic to G(L) for some L ∈ MΓ . To see that L ∼      = Lw−1
it is enough to check that for v ∈ Γ the space Hom((G(Lv ), G(Lw )∗ )) is one di-
mensional if v = w−1 , and is zero otherwise. We have Hom((G(Lv ), G(Lw )∗ )) =
Hom(G(Lw ) ◦ G(Lv ), IdMΓ ). Notice that G(Lw ) ◦ G(Lv ) preserves the direct sum-
mand MΓ∩Γ−1 ⊂ MΓ and is zero on its complement. It follows that
    Hom(G(Lw ) ◦ G(Lv ), IdMΓ ) = Hom(G(Lw ) ◦ G(Lv )|MΓ ∩Γ−1 , IdMΓ ∩Γ−1 ).
Since MΓ∩Γ−1 ∼
             = Rep(Fc ) by 3.4, and the category of module functors from Rep(H)
to Rep(H) (considered as the free module over itself) is equivalent to Rep(H), we
see that
           Hom(G(Lw ) ◦ G(Lv ), IdMΓ∩Γ−1 ) = HomMΓ∩Γ−1 (Lw • Lv , Ldf ),
thus (∗) follows from Proposition 5.3.
   Irreducibility of G(Lw ) follows from (∗) and part (a), because the dual object
of an irreducible object (in the category of functors) is irreducible. It remains to
check that any module functor φ : MΓ → Rep(Fc ) is isomorphic to the one coming
from some L ∈ MΓ−1 . Consider φ as an endofunctor MΓ (i.e. take its composition
with the imbedding Rep(Fc ) = MΓ∩Γ−1 ֒→ MΓ ); then by (a) the adjoint functor
φ∗ is isomorphic to G(L) for L ∈ MΓ , so this statement also follows from (∗). 
   We can now prove (i).
   Corollary. Any irreducible functor from F unRep(Fc ) (X, X) appears as a direct
summand of G(Lw′ • Lw ), w ∈ Γ, w′ ∈ Γ−1 .
   Proof. We need to prove that any irreducible functor f ∈ F unRep(Fc ) (X, X)
is a direct summand of a composite functor CohFc (X) → Rep(Fc ) → CohFc (X).
For this we choose any functor g : CohFc (X) → Rep(Fc ) such that the composition
g ◦ f is nonzero. Let g ∗ be the adjoint functor to g. Then f is evidently a direct
summand of (g ∗ ◦ g) ◦ f which admits the required factorisation g ∗ ◦ (g ◦ f ). 
5.4.2. Lemma. For any w ∈ c − D we have Hom(G(Lw ), id) = 0.
   Proof. We note that Lw as an object of Mc is a direct summand of Lu • Lv
where u ∈ Γ−1 and v ∈ Γ (this follows easily for the example from Theorem 1.8 in
[10] II). Assume that Hom(G(Lw ), id) 6= 0 and hence Hom(G(Lu • Lv ), id) 6= 0.
Then we get a nonzero transformation G(Lu ) → G(Lv )∗ ; since both functors are
irreducible by Lemma 5.4.1 they are actually isomorphic. On the other hand,
Proposition 5.3 provides a non-zero transformation G(Lu ) ◦ G(L−1 u ) → Id, which
also yields an isomorphism G(Lu )∗ ∼ = G(Lu−1 ). Thus G(Lu−1 ) ∼ = G(Lv ), and by
Lemma 5.4.1 this yields Lu−1 ∼ = Lv , so v = u−1 . Furthermore, dimHom(G(Lu •
Lv ), id) = dimHom(G(Lv ), G(Lu )∗ ) = 1; and by Proposition 5.3 the object Lu • Lv
contains Ld for a uniquely defined d ∈ D. Since Hom(G(Ld ), id) 6= 0 we have that
Hom(Lw , id) = 0 if w 6= d. The Lemma is proved. 
   Now we can prove (ii)
   Corollary. For any w ∈ c the functor G(Lw ) is irreducible.
   Proof. Consider the adjoint functor G(Lw )∗ . By Lemma 5.4.1 any sum-
mand of G(Lw )∗ appears as a direct summand of G(Lw′ ). For such w′ we have
     ON TENSOR CATEGORIES ATTACHED TO CELLS IN AFFINE WEYL GROUPS II                            13


a non-zero transformation G(Lw′ ) ◦ G(Lw ) = G(Lw • Lw′ ) → Id, and by Lemma
5.4.2 and Proposition 5.3 this is possible only when w′ = w−1 . If G(Lw ) is re-
ducible this implies that dimHom(G(Lw ) ◦ G(Lw−1 ), id) > 1. On the other hand
dimHom(G(Lw ) ◦ G(Lw−1 ), id) = dimHom(G(Lw−1 • Lw ), id) = 1 by Proposition
5.3 and Lemma 5.4.2, and we get a contradiction. 

5.4.3. We can now prove (iii). Assume that G(Lw ) = G(Lw′ ). Then G(Lw ) ◦
G(Lw−1 ) = G(Lw′ ) ◦ G(Lw−1 ). Since Hom(G(Lw ) ◦ G(Lw−1 ), id) 6= 0 we have that
Hom(G(Lw′ ) ◦ G(Lw−1 ), id) 6= 0 and by the Proposition 5.3 w′ = (w−1 )−1 = w.
   Since we proved (i) (ii) and (iii) the Theorem 4 is proved. 

5.5. Examples. The Corollary 5.2 can be applied in the following cases:
    (a) Let G be a simply connected group and let c be the lowest cell. In this case
uc = e ∈ G and Fc = G. In this case Corollary 5.2 is a result of [16].
    (b) Let G = GLn . In this case all groups Fc are connected and have no nontrivial
projective representations (these groups are products of various GLm ). In this case
we get a result of [18].
    (c) Let G be a simply connected group of rank 2. In this case one easily verifies
that the condition of Corollary 5.2 is satisfied and we get a result of [17].
    (d) Let G be a simple simply connected group. Let c be the subregular cell, that
is the cell corresponding to the subregular nilpotent orbit. Again one easily verifies
that the condition of Corollary 5.2 is satisfied except if G is of type Cn . In the
latter case Fc = Z/2Z × Z/2Z where one of the factors comes from the center of G.
One can exlude centrally extended points in this case by considering a reductive
group G1 = G × T /(z, −1) where T is the one dimensional torus, z ∈ G is the
unique nontrivial central element and −1 ∈ T is the unique nontrivial involutive
element. So we get another result of [17].
    Finally note that centrally extended points naturally appear in the description
of truncated convolution categories for simple non simply-connected groups, see in
[18] 8.3 example with G = P SL2 .

                                         References
  [1] A. Beilinson, J. Bernstein, A proof of Jantzen conjectures, I. M. Gelfand Seminar, 1–50,
      Adv. Soviet Math., 16, Part 1, Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 1993.
  [2] A. Beilinson, I. Bernstein, P. Deligne, Faisceaux pervers, Asterisque 100 (1982).
  [3] A. Beilinson, V. Drinfeld, Quantization of Hitchin Integrable System, preprint, available at
      http:/www.math.uchicago.edu/∼benzvi/Math.html
  [4] R.Bezrukavnikov, On tensor categories attached to cells in affine Weyl groups, preprint
      math.RT/0010089.
  [5] L. Crane, I. Frenkel, Four-dimensional topological quantum field theory, Hopf categories,
      and the canonical bases, Topology and Physics, J. Math. Phys. 35 (1994), no. 10, 5136-
      5154.
  [6] V. Ginzburg, Perverse sheaves on a Loop group and Langlands’ duality, preprint alg-
      geom/9511007.
  [7] D. Gaitsgory, Construction of central elements in the affine Hecke algebra via nearby cycles,
      preprint math.AG/9912074.
  [8] C. Kassel, Quantum groups, Graduate Texts in Mathematics, 155, Springer-Verlag, New
      York, 1995.
  [9] G. Lusztig, Intersection cohomology methods in representation theory, Proceedings of the
      International Congress of Mathematicians, Vol. I, II (Kyoto, 1990), 155-174.
 [10] G. Lusztig, Cells in affine Weyl groups, in “Algebraic groups and related topics”, Adv.
      Studies in Pure Math., vol. 6, 1985, 255-287; II, J. Algebra 109 (1987), no. 2, 536-548; III,
14                    ROMAN BEZRUKAVNIKOV AND VIKTOR OSTRIK


      J. Fac. Sci. Univ. Tokyo Sect IA Math. 34 (1987), no. 2, 223-243; IV, J. Fac. Sci. Univ.
      Tokyo Sect IA Math. 36 (1989), no. 2, 297-328.
 [11] G. Lusztig, Leading coefficients of character values of Hecke algebras, Proc. Symp. in Pure
      Math. 47 (1987), 235-262.
 [12] G. Lusztig, Cells in affine Weyl groups and tensor categories, Adv. Math. 129 (1997), no.
      1, 85-98.
 [13] G. Lusztig, N. Xi, Canonical left cells in affine Weyl groups, Adv. Math. 72 (1988), no. 2,
      284-288.
 [14] I. Mirkovic, K. Vilonen, Perverse sheaves on affine Grassmannians and Langlands duality,
      Math. Res. Lett. 7 (2000), no. 1, 13-24.
 [15] V. Ostrik, Module categories, weak Hopf algebras and modular invariants, in preparation.
 [16] N. Xi, The based ring of the lowest two-sided cell of an affine Weyl group, J. Algebra 134
      (1990), no. 2, 356-368.
 [17] N. Xi, Representations of affine Hecke algebras, LNM 1587.
 [18] N. Xi, The based ring of two-sided cells of affine Weyl groups of type Ãn−1 , preprint
      math.QA/0010159.
   E-mail address: roman@math.uchicago.edu

     E-mail address: ostrik@math.mit.edu
