                                               Projective-injective modules, Serre functors and
arXiv:math/0508119v2 [math.RT] 6 Sep 2005




                                                              symmetric algebras
                                                        Volodymyr Mazorchuk and Catharina Stroppel


                                                                                Abstract
                                                     We describe Serre functors for (generalisations of) the category O
                                                 associated with a semi-simple complex Lie algebra. In our approach,
                                                 projective-injective modules, that is modules which are both, projec-
                                                 tive and injective, play an important role. They control the Serre func-
                                                 tor in the case of a quasi-hereditary algebra having a double centraliser
                                                 given by a projective-injective module whose endomorphism ring is a
                                                 symmetric algebra. As an application of the double centraliser prop-
                                                 erty together with our description of Serre functors, we prove three
                                                 conjectures of Khovanov about the projective-injective modules in the
                                                 parabolic category O0µ (sln ).


                                            Contents
                                            1 Introduction                                                                          2

                                            2 Standardly stratified structure and double centralisers                                6
                                              2.1 Tilting modules and Ringel duality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                   7
                                              2.2 Double centraliser property . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                  9
                                              2.3 Double centralizer and projective-injective modules . . . . . .                   10

                                            3 Serre functors                                                         13
                                              3.1 A characterisation of Serre functors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
                                              3.2 Serre functors via partial coapproximation . . . . . . . . . . . 16

                                            4 Applications                                                                          19
                                              4.1 Bernstein-Gelfand-Gelfand category O . . . . . . . . .            .   .   .   .   19
                                              4.2 The parabolic category O in the sense of Rocha-Caridi             .   .   .   .   22
                                              4.3 Harish-Chandra bimodules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          .   .   .   .   29
                                              4.4 The category O for rational Cherednik algebras . . . .            .   .   .   .   30

                                            5 Projective-injectives in the category Op(sln (C))                       32
                                              5.1 On a result of Irving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
                                              5.2 On Khovanov’s conjectures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34


                                                                                    1
1    Introduction
Symmetric algebras are particularly well-behaved algebras with several spe-
cial properties. We first want to recall two of these properties and then
discuss to which extend they can be generalised and transferred to other
finite dimensional algebras. A finite dimensional algebra A is called sym-
metric if there is an A-bimodule isomorphism A ∼ = A∗ . In particular, pro-
jective A-modules are always injective. On the other hand, since A ∼
                                                                   = A∗ as
A-bimodules, the isomorphism of vector spaces

            HomA (A, A) ∼
                        = HomA (A, A∗ ⊗A A) ∼
                                            = HomA (A, A)∗

gives rise to an isomorphism

           HomA (M, N ) ∼
                        = HomA (M, A∗ ⊗A N ) ∼
                                             = HomA (N, M )∗

for any free A-modules M and N . Moreover, this isomorphism is functorial
in M and N .
The question we want to ask now is whether these two properties can be
transferred somehow to a more general class of algebras. We will consider
finite dimensional algebras which have a symmetric subalgebra which, in
some sense, can control the representation theory of the original algebra. If
we are lucky, A has “enough” projective modules which are also injective.
We fix a system of representatives for the isomorphism classes of indecom-
posable projective-injective (i.e. at the same time projective and injective)
A-modules. Then, instead of considering A itself we propose to consider
the direct sum, say Q, of all modules from this fixed system. The endomor-
phism ring EndA (Q) is at least a Frobenius algebra. The following questions
naturally arise

    • Is EndA (Q) a symmetric algebra?

    • How much information about the category of finitely generated A-
      modules is already encoded in Q and EndA (Q)?

    • Is there an isomorphism, functorial in both entries,

             HomA (P1 , P2 ) ∼
                             = HomA (P1 , A∗ ⊗A P2 ) ∼
                                                     = HomA (P2 , P1 )∗

      for any projective-injective A-modules P1 and P2 ?

    In general, the first question is very difficult to answer. Concerning the
second question, we will describe the situation where all the information
about A -mod is already contained in Q and EndA (Q). This is given by the
so-called double centraliser property which we will explain more precisely


                                      2
shortly. The last question relates to the existence and description of a so-
called Serre functor, motivated by Serre’s duality for sheaves on projective
varieties. The purpose of this paper is to answer the above three questions
for certain algebras appearing in representation theory.
     To substantiate and to specify our approach we would like to recall the
important role projective-injective modules play in representation theory, in
particular in different versions of the category O. The striking example is
the case of an integral block of the category O for a semisimple complex Lie
algebra. By Soergel’s result ([Soe90, Endomorphismensatz and Struktur-
satz]) such a block can be completely described by (a certain subcategory
of) the category of finitely generated modules over the endomorphism ring of
the (unique up to isomorphism) indecomposable projective-injective module
in this block. This idea was generalised and formalised in [KSX01] as the so-
called double centraliser property. In this language, Soergel’s result could be
stated as follows: Let A be a finite dimensional algebra such that A -mod is
equivalent to the block of the category O in question. Then for the indecom-
posable projective-injective A-module Q we have A = EndEndA (Q) (Q). Note
that [Soe90, Endomorphismensatz] implies that EndA (Q) is a symmetric
algebra.
     Using the Ringel duality functor it is easy to see (Corollary 2.4) that
there is always a tilting module T having the double centraliser property
above. This module T need not to be projective-injective in general. Nev-
ertheless, there are many known examples where we have the particularly
handy situation of the double centraliser property with respect to a projective-
injective tilting module T . We recall such examples in Section 2. Since in
these cases the category A -mod is completely determined by EndA (T ) and
T , it follows directly that the centre of A -mod is isomorphic to the centre
of the endomorphism ring of T (in particular [Kho04, Conjecture 4] follows,
see Theorem 5.2).
     Motivated by Serre’s duality, there is the notion of a Serre functor for
any k-linear category with finite dimensional homomorphism spaces (see
Section 3). Kapranov and Bondal ([BK89]) showed that the bounded de-
rived category D b (A) for any finite dimensional algebra A of finite global
dimension admits a Serre functor. In fact, the existence of a Serre functor is
equivalent to the finiteness of the global dimension of A and also to the ex-
istence of Auslander-Reiten triangles ([RVdB02], [Hap91]). It is well-known
that in the latter case the Serre functor is the left derived of the Nakayama
functor (see e.g. [Hap88, page 37]), that is of the functor isomorphic to
A∗ ⊗A •. However, if the algebra A is not explicitly given, the Serre functor
might be hard to compute.
     Nevertheless, in some cases the Serre functor for D b (A) can be explicitly
described, using for instance geometric or functorial methods. For example,


                                      3
in [BK89] it was conjectured that the Serre functor of the bounded derived
category of perverse sheaves on flag varieties is given by a geometrically
defined intertwining functor. This was our motivation to study the Serre
functor of the bounded derived category of (integral blocks of) O, associated
with the corresponding semi-simple Lie algebra, which is equivalent to the
category of perverse sheaves in question. The original conjecture has recently
been proved by Beilinson, Bezrukavnikov and Mirkovic in [BBM04]. In the
present paper we explicitly construct the Serre functor for the bounded de-
rived category of any integral block of O using the twisting functors, defined
in [Ark97] and studied e.g. in [AS03]. Our approach is purely algebraic and
does not require the explicit knowledge of the associative algebra associated
to O. As a (very unexpected) consequence we obtain an isomorphism be-
tween a certain composition of twisting functors and a certain composition
of Irving’s shuffling functors (see Corollary 4.2).
    We further apply this result to construct the Serre functors of the bounded
derived categories of (integral blocks of) of any parabolic category Op in the
sense of Rocha-Caridi, [RC80]. Using the explicit description of the Serre
functor (in terms of shuffling functors) we prove in Theorem 4.6 that the
endomorphism algebra of the sum of all indecomposable projective-injective
modules in Op is symmetric, which was conjectured by Khovanov. One of
the motivations to consider the category of projective-injective modules in
Op is to find a precise connection between Khovanov’s categorification of the
Jones polynomial ([Kho00]) and the categorification of the Jones polynomial
via representation theory of the Lie algebra sln (as proposed in [BFK99] and
proved in [Str05]). It might be possible to simplify the approach in [BFK99]
and [Str05] by working with these symmetric endomorphism algebras. More-
over, from a topological point of view it seems to be much more natural and
plausible to work with symmetric (or at least Frobenius) algebras to con-
struct knot invariants instead of the complicated algebras which describe
the integral blocks of the (parabolic) category O.
    We expect that the Serre functor for the category O for rational Chered-
nik algebras can be constructed in a similar way via twisting functors as the
Serre functor for the Bernstein-Gelfand-Gelfand category O. However, we
are not able to prove this, mainly because of the lack of translation functors.
Nevertheless, we give a description of the Serre functor for the category O
for rational Cherednik algebras via partial coapproximation with respect
to the direct sum of all indecomposable projective-injective modules (see
[KM05, 2.5]). The proof however uses the fact that Hecke algebras are sym-
metric and the properties of the Knizhnik-Zamolodchikov-functor. Using
[GGOR03, Remark 5.10] it might be possible to construct the Serre functor
in a different way, which would imply a conceptual proof of the fact ([CIK71])
that the Hecke algebras occurring here are symmetric (see Conjecture 4.12).


                                      4
    In the last section of the paper we consider the special case of a parabolic
category, O0p(sln ), for the Lie algebra sln . For this category we give an eas-
ier proof of the main result of [Irv85] (Theorem 5.1). As a consequence
we show that there is a double centraliser property with respect to a ba-
sic projective-injective module. This implies [Kho04, Conjecture 4]. The
parabolic subalgebra p of sln is determined by some composition of n. In
[Irv85, Proposition 4.3] it is shown that indecomposable projective-injective
modules in O0 (sln )p are indexed by the elements of some left cell. The
Kazhdan-Lusztig combinatorics of translation functors, applied to these
projective-injective modules, suggests a connection with Specht modules for
the symmetric group Sn . It is well known that the Specht modules which
correspond to different compositions of n, but giving rise to the same par-
tition of n, are isomorphic. This observation might have led M. Khovanov
to the conjecture that the endomorphism algebras of the basic projective-
injective modules in different O0 (sln )p, corresponding to the same partition
of n, are isomorphic. We finish the paper by proving this conjecture (The-
orem 5.4).

Some guidance for the reader: Section 2 recalls some facts and results
on double centralisers for module categories over standardly stratified alge-
bras. In principle, the content is not new, the viewpoint might be slightly
more general than usual. We formulated the setup as generally as possi-
ble, since we believe that our approach can be applied to a much wider
class of algebras than the ones actually appearing in the paper. For the
reader, however, it might be more approachable to have first a look at the
Examples 2.7, skip the details of Section 2 and focus on the main result char-
acterising Serre functors which can be found in Section 3. Applications and
concrete descriptions of Serre functors are given in Section 4. The deepest
result might be Theorem 4.6 stating that the endomorphism ring of a basic
projective-injective module in the principal block of a (parabolic) category
O is not only Frobenius, but symmetric.

Acknowledgements. We thank Mikhail Khovanov for sharing his ideas
with us and for many helpful discussions and remarks. We also would like
to thank Iain Gordon for many useful discussions and explanations and Ken
Brown for useful remarks. We also thank Joshua Sussan for comments on a
preliminary version of the paper. The first author was partially supported
by The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, The Swedish Research Council,
and STINT. The second author was supported by EPSRC.




                                       5
2    Standardly stratified structure and double cen-
     tralisers
In representation theory double centraliser properties play an important role.
The aim of this section is to recollect known results from the literature, to
emphasise the universal principle behind it, and to show the significance of
projective-injective modules.
    Let k be an algebraically closed field. Let A be a unital finite dimensional
associative k-algebra. We denote by A -mod (mod −A) the category of finite
dimensional left (resp. right) A-modules. In the following we will mainly
work with left A-modules, hence an “A-module” is always meant to be a left
A-module. For M , N ∈ A -mod we denote by TrM N the trace of M in N
(which is by definition the submodule of N , generated by the images of all
morphisms from M to N ).
    Let {L(λ)}λ∈Λ be a complete set of representatives for the isomorphism
classes of simple A-modules. For a simple A-module, L(λ), we denote by
P (λ) its projective cover, and by I(λ) its injective hull. We assume that
there is a partial pre-order  (i.e. a reflexive and transitive binary relation)
on Λ, which we fix. Let P ≻λ = µ≻λ P (µ) and P λ = µλ P (µ).
                                  L                         L

    With respect to  we define the so-called standard module ∆(λ) to be
the largest quotient of P (λ) containing only composition factors of the form
L(µ), where λ 6≺ µ, i.e. ∆(λ) = P (λ)/ TrP ≻λ P (λ). We also have a proper
standard module ∆(λ) which is the largest quotient of P (λ) such that its
radical contains only composition factors of the form L(µ), where λ 6 µ,
i.e. ∆(λ) = P (λ)/ TrP λ rad P (λ). Dually, we have the costandard module
∇(λ) and the proper costandard module ∇(λ).
    We denote by F(∆A ) = F(∆) the full subcategory of A -mod given by
all modules having a filtration, with all subquotients of this filtration being
isomorphic to ∆(λ) for various λ ∈ Λ. If M ∈ F(∆) then we say that M has
a standard flag. Similarly, we define F(∆), F(∇), F(∇), the categories of
modules having a proper standard, a costandard, and a proper costandard
flag respectively.
    Let A be a finite dimensional standardly stratified algebra as defined in
[CPS96], that is

    • the kernel of the canonical surjection P (λ)→
                                                  →∆(λ) has a standard flag;

    • the kernel of the canonical surjection ∆(λ)→
                                                 →L(λ) has a filtration with
      subquotients L(µ), where µ  λ.

   In particular, if  is a partial order and ∆(λ) = ∆(λ) for λ, then A is
quasi-hereditary (see [CPS88, DR89]). If  is a partial order and any ∆(λ)
has a proper standard flag, then A is properly stratified (see [Dla00]).


                                       6
     We call a module M basic with respect to some property P, if M is the
direct sum of pairwise non-isomorphic indecomposable modules with prop-
erty P and any indecomposable module having this property is isomorphic
to a summand in M . For example, a basic projective module in A -mod is a
minimal projective generator. If N = ⊕ki=1 Nimi , where mi ∈ {1, 2, . . . } for
all i, with Ni indecomposable and pairwise non-isomorphic, we set Nbasic =
⊕ki=1 Ni .

2.1   Tilting modules and Ringel duality
A tilting module is an object in F(∆) ∩ F(∇), and a cotilting module is an
object in F(∆) ∩ F(∇). In [Fri04] it is shown that for a standardly stratified
algebra the category F(∆) ∩ F(∇) is closed under taking direct summands
and that the indecomposable modules in this category are in natural bijec-
tion with standard modules. Let T (λ) denote the unique indecomposable
tilting module having a standard flag, where ∆(λ) occurs as a submodule.
Let T = ⊕λ∈Λ T (λ) be the characteristic tilting module. There is the dual
notion of cotilting modules. In general, cotilting modules cannot be classified
in the same way as tilting modules. However, this can be done in the case
when the opposite algebra Aopp is also standardly stratified (with respect to
the same partial pre-order), see [Fri04, 4.2]. For quasi-hereditary algebras
cotilting and tilting modules obviously coincide, but in general they do not
have to. The Ringel duality functor (as introduced in [Rin91]) was stud-
ied in the more general setup of various stratified algebras for example in
[ÁHLU00] and [Fri04]. We will need the following slight variation of these
results:

Proposition 2.1. Let A be a standardly stratified algebra. Then the Ringel
dual R(A) = EndA (T ) is standardly stratified and the contravariant functor
R = HomA (•, T ) : A -mod → mod- R(A) satisfies the following properties:

(1) R maps tilting modules to projective modules.

(2) R maps projective modules to tilting modules.

(3) R defines an equivalence of categories F(∆A ) ∼
                                                  = F(∆R(A) ).

Proof. That the algebra R(A) is standardly stratified follows for example
from [Fri04, Theorem 5 (iii)]. Obviously, T is mapped to EndA (T ), hence it
is projective. Taking direct summands implies the first statement. The last
statement is proved analogously to [ÁHLU00, Theorem 2.6 (iv)] (note that
the duality D used there swaps standard and costandard modules). To prove
the second statement let now Q be projective, then RQ has a standard flag.
Of course, Ext1A (Q, ∆(λ)) = 0 for any λ. Using the last part of the propo-
sition we get Ext1R(A) (R∆(λ), RQ) = 0, even Ext1R(A) (∆R(A) (λ), RQ) = 0 for

                                      7
any standard module ∆R(A) (λ) ∈ R(A) -mod. Therefore, (see e.g. [Fri04,
Theorem 3] and [ÁHLU00, Theorem 1.6]), RQ has a proper costandard flag,
hence it is tilting.

    For any abelian category C we denote by D b (C) its bounded derived
category. If C = A -mod we set D b (A) = D b (C). If the opposite is not
explicitly stated, by a “functor” we always mean a covariant functor. We
use the standard notation like LF , RG, Li F , Ri G etc. to denote left derived
and right derived functors and their i-th cohomology functors.
    For the sake of completeness we mention the following fact

Proposition 2.2. Let A and B be standardly stratified such that tilting
modules are also cotilting. Let F : A -mod → B -mod be a (covariant) right-
exact functor with right adjoint G. Assume that F defines an equivalence
                                   A           B
                              F(∆ ) ∼
                                    = F(∇ ).

Then the following hold

(1) F maps projective modules to tilting modules and tilting modules to in-
    jective modules. In fact, F defines equivalences (with inverse G) of the
    corresponding additive subcategories.

(2) If A has finite global dimension then B has finite global dimension as
    well, moreover, LF : D b (A) → D b (B) is an equivalence with inverse
    RG.

(3) B is the Ringel dual of A.
                                                              B
Proof. Let P ∈ A -mod be projective, then F P ∈ F(∇ ) by assumption
and

    Ext1B (F P, ∇(λ)) ∼
                      = Ext1B (F P, F F −1 ∇(λ)) ∼
                                                 = Ext1A (P, F −1 ∇(λ)) = 0

for any proper costandard module ∇(λ). Hence F P ∈ F(∆B ) and is there-
                                                            A
fore tilting. If X is tilting, hence cotilting, then X ∈ F(∆ ). Therefore
             B
F X ∈ F(∇ ) and
                     B                            B
             Ext1B (∇ (λ), F X) ∼
                                = Ext1B (F F −1 ∇ (λ), F X)
                                ∼               B
                                = Ext1 (F −1 ∇ (λ), X) = 0
                                           A                               (2.1)
                                       B                  B            A
for any proper costandard module ∇ (λ), since F −1 ∇ (λ) ∈ F(∆ ) and
                                                             B
X ∈ F(∇A ). If we now choose an inclusion of F X ∈ F(∇ ) in its injective
                                           B
hull, then the cokernel is contained in F(∇ ) and the inclusion splits because
of (2.1). This means that F X is injective and the first part follows. We have

                                       8
RG LF ∼  = ID on projectives and LF RG ∼= ID on injectives. This implies
that the global dimension of B is finite and then the second statement
follows. The fact that B is the Ringel dual of A is then clear from the
definitions.

2.2   Double centraliser property
We claim that, given a standardly stratified algebra A, there is always some
tilting module X such that we have a double centraliser property, A ∼      =
EndEndA (X) (X). This relies on the following

Proposition 2.3. Let A be standardly stratified and let R = R(A) be its
Ringel dual. Let P be the projective cover of the characteristic tilting module
T in mod- R. Then there is an exact sequence 0 → A → Q → coker → 0,
where Q = R−1 P (see Proposition 2.1) is tilting and coker ∈ F(∆A ).

Proof. Since P, T ∈ F(∆R ), the kernel K of the surjection between P and
T is contained in F(∆R ) ([ÁHLU00, Theorem 1.6 (i)] and [Fri04, Theo-
rem 3]). Applying the inverse of the Ringel duality functor (which is defined
on F(∆R )) we get the short exact sequence

                         0 → A → Q → coker → 0,

where coker ∈ F(∆) by Proposition 2.1.

Corollary 2.4. There exists a (basic) tilting module X such that we have
an isomorphism, A ∼
                  = EndEndA (X) (X).

Proof. Let Y be a tilting module such that we have an inclusion coker ֒→ Y
(the existence follows from [AR91, Theorem 5.4]). Put X := (Q ⊕ Y )basic ,
then there exists an exact sequence, 0 → coker → X n , satisfying the as-
sumptions of [KSX01, Theorem 2.8]. Hence the double centraliser property
follows.

Remark 2.5. One can show that there exists a minimal basic tilting module
Y with the following property: any M ∈ F(∆) embeds into Y m for some
m. Here minimal means that every other tilting module with the latter
property has Y as a direct summand. However, it is not clear whether there
exists a minimal basic tilting module Y , with respect to which one has the
double centraliser property. It is the case in all the examples we know, in
particular in the Examples 2.7.
    In general, it could happen that X is already the characteristic tilting
module, and the statement of Corollary 2.4 is not very useful. As an example
we refer to [KK99, Example A1 ] where the algebra A is given by all 3 × 3
upper triangular matrices over some field k with the matrix idempotents e1 ,


                                      9
e2 , e3 and the quasi-hereditary structure given by the ordering 1 < 2 < 3.
The same algebra, but with the quasi-hereditary structure given by the
reversed order (see [KK99, Example A2 ]) provides also an example, where
X is not contained in Add(Q), the additive category generated by Q. In
particular, we do not have the double centralizer property with respect to
Q.

2.3   Double centralizer and projective-injective modules
On the other hand, under the assumptions and notation of Proposition 2.3
we have the following nice situation, where projective-injective modules play
a crucial role.

Corollary 2.6. If the injective hull of any standard module is contained in
Add(Q), then the following holds:

               A∼
                = EndEndA (Q) (Q) ∼
                                  = EndEndA (Qbasic ) (Qbasic ).

Proof. If the injective envelope of any standard module is contained in
Add Q, the assumptions of [KSX01, Theorem 2.8; Theorem 2.10] are sat-
isfied and the statement follows.

   As interesting examples we have the following:

Examples 2.7. In the examples which follow we illustrate the use of Propo-
sition 2.3 and Corollary 2.4, in particular, we explicitly describe the modules
Q and X which appear in the double centraliser statements.

  1. Let A be such that A -mod is equivalent to an integral block of the
     Bernstein-Gelfand-Gelfand category O for some semi-simple complex
     Lie algebra g (see [BGG76]). The algebra A is equipped with the
     usual quasi-hereditary structure (given by the Bruhat order and the
     Verma modules as standard modules). In this case we have exactly
     one indecomposable projective-injective module, namely the projective
     cover P (w0 ) of the unique simple standard (or Verma) module in this
     block. Moreover, A is Ringel self-dual ([Soe97, Theorem 5.12 and
     Bemerkung 2.4 (3)]). The projective cover of a tilting module is a
     direct sum of P (w0 )’s. Via Ringel duality we get an inclusion

                                    i : A ֒→ Q,                           (2.2)

      where Q = P (w0 )n for some positive integer n. The cokernel of this
      inclusion has (by Proposition 2.3) a standard (or Verma-) flag. Hence
      there is an exact sequence of the form

                              0 → A −→ Q −→ Qm ,                          (2.3)

                                      10
   for some positive integer m. We could take X = Qbasic = P (w0 ) and
   get the famous double centraliser theorem of Soergel ([Soe90], see also
   [KSX01, Theorem 3.2]), namely A ∼  = EndEndA (X) (X).

2. Let Ap be such that Ap -mod is equivalent to an integral block of some
   parabolic category Op in the sense of [RC80] (see also Section 4.2) with
   the usual quasi-hereditary structure. Then Ap is Ringel-self-dual (see
   [Soe97] or Proposition 4.4 below). The self-dual projective modules
   are exactly the summands occurring in the injective hulls of standard
   modules ([Irv85]), they are also exactly the summands occurring in the
   projective cover of tilting modules. This means, we have an embedding
   of the form (2.2) and then an exact sequence of the form (2.3), where
   Q is a direct sum of projective-injective modules. If we set X = Qbasic
   the sum over (a system of representatives for the isomorphism classes
   of) all indecomposable projective-injective modules we get the double
   centraliser property Ap ∼ = EndEndAp (X) (X) (this is proved in [Str03b,
   Theorem 10.1]).

3. Let g be a semisimple complex Lie algebra. Let H be the category of
   Harish-Chandra bimodules for g, that is the category of g-bimodules
   which are of finite length and locally finite for the adjoint action of g
   (see for example [BG80] or [Jan83, Section 6]). The category H decom-
   poses into blocks λ Hµ . A bimodule X ∈ H is contained in the block
                                         n                               n
   λ Hµ if it is annihilated by (ker χλ ) from the left and by (ker χµ ) from
   the right for some positive integer n, where ker χλ is the annihilator of
   the Verma module with highest weight λ. The category λ Hµ does not
   have projective objects, however, we get enough projectives (see e.g.
   [Jan83, 6.14]) if we consider the full subcategory λ Hµ1 of λ Hµ given
   by all bimodules which are annihilated by ker χµ from the right hand
   side. Let Aµλ be such that Aµλ -mod ∼   = λ Hµ1 , where λ and µ are integral.
            µ
   Then Aλ is standardly stratified (it is not quasi-hereditary in general)
   and contains a unique indecomposable projective-injective module (see
   [KM02, Corollary 2]). Later (Proposition 4.9) we give a new proof for
   the fact that Aµλ is Ringel self-dual (see [FKM00, Theorem 3] for the
   original argument). As in category O, the projective cover of a tilting
   module is projective-injective, and hence Q becomes a direct sum of
   copies of the unique self-dual indecomposable projective module. The
   injective hulls of standard modules are projective as well. Hence we
   could take X = Qbasic , the indecomposable projective-injective module
   and get the double centraliser Aµλ ∼   = EndEndAµ (X) (X).
                                                    λ


4. Let A be such that A -mod ∼
                             = O(Hc ), the category O for some rational
   Cherednik algebra Hc = H0,c as considered for example in [Gua03]


                                     11
      or [GGOR03]. The projective-injective modules are exactly the sum-
      mands occurring in the injective hulls of standard modules ([GGOR03,
      Proposition 5.21]), they are also exactly the summands occurring in
      the projective covers of tilting modules. Hence, Q is a direct sum of
      projective-injectives and then we could take X = Qbasic to be the sum
      over all indecomposable projective tilting modules. This is the double
      centraliser property from [GGOR03, Theorem 5.16].
  5. Quite often there are double centraliser properties with respect to tilt-
     ing modules, which do not have to be projective or injective. In the
     following examples the tilting module X is neither projective nor in-
     jective: Let Q be a finite quiver with vertices {1, . . . , n}. Assume it is
     directed, that is an arrow from i to j exists only if i > j. Let A = A(Q)
     be the corresponding path algebra and D be its dual extension, that
     is the algebra A ⊗k Aopp with the relations (radAopp )(radA) = 0 (see
     e.g. [DX94]). Then D is quasi-hereditary with respect to the natural
     order on {1, . . . , n}. One can show that there is a double centraliser
     property with respect to the tilting module X = Qbasic = ⊕i T (i),
     where the sum runs over all sources of Q. It is also easy to see that X
     is neither injective nor projective in general.
Remark 2.8. Let A and X be as in the examples above, then we could
define
                     V : A -mod −→ EndA (X) -mod
                              M       −→ HomA (X, M ).
The double centraliser property can be reformulated as: The functor V is
fully faithful on projective modules, i.e. V induces an isomorphism
                HomA (P1 , P2 ) ∼
                                = HomEndA (X) (VP1 , VP2 )
for all projective modules P1 and P2 .
    Another easy consequence from the definitions is the following: The
functor V is fully faithful on tilting modules, i.e. V induces an isomorphism
                 HomA (T1 , T2 ) ∼
                                 = HomEndA (X) (VT1 , VT2 )                (2.4)
for all tilting modules T1 and T2 .

Proof. If HomA (T1 , K) = 0 = HomA (K, T2 ) for any K ∈ A -mod such that
VK = 0 then
                 HomA (T1 , T2 ) ∼
                                 = HomEndA (X) (VT1 , VT2 )
since V is a quotient functor (see [Gab62]). All the composition factors in
K are annihilated by V. On the other hand, none of the composition factors
in the head of T1 and in the socle of T2 is annihilated by V. This proves the
statement.

                                        12
3    Serre functors
The aim of the present section is to develop an effective machinery to de-
scribe Serre functors for the categories appearing in the examples above,
where the algebra is not given explicitly. Let C be a k-linear additive cat-
egory with finite dimensional homomorphism spaces. A right Serre functor
is an additive endofunctor F of C together with isomorphisms

                 ΨX,Y : HomC (X, F Y ) ∼
                                       = HomC (Y, X)∗ ,                    (3.1)

natural in X and Y . Here, ∗ denotes the ordinary duality for vector spaces.
Right Serre functors satisfy the following properties:

    • Two right Serre functors are isomorphic (see [RVdB02, Lemma I.1.3]).

    • If ǫ is an auto-equivalence of C and F is a right Serre functor then
      ǫF ∼= F ǫ. (It follows directly from the definitions that ǫF ǫ−1 is a right
      Serre functor, hence it must be isomorphic to F ).

A right Serre functor is a Serre functor if it is an auto-equivalence of C.
By general results (see [BK89]), for any finite dimensional algebra A of fi-
nite global dimension, there is a Serre functor S for the bounded derived
category D b (A), more precisely S ∼ = LH, where H = A∗ ⊗A • ([BK89, Ex-
ample 3.2(3)]). In the literature, the functor H is often called the Nakayama
functor (see e.g. [Hap88, page 37]). This is because H ∼   = HomA (•, A)∗ .
    Recall that for any abelian category C we denote by D b (C) its bounded
derived category. If C = A -mod we set D b (A) = D b (C). We use the standard
notation like LF , RG, Li F , Ri G etc. to denote left derived and right derived
functors and their i-th cohomology functors. Let also Dperf (A) denote the
full subcategory of D b (A), consisting of perfect complexes (i.e. of those
complexes which are quasi-isomorphic to bounded complexes of projective
A-modules).
    In order to be able to describe more explicitly the Serre functors for
some of the examples mentioned above we will need effective tools to detect
Serre functors. Recall that a finite-dimensional algebra, A, is called self-
injective provided that A ∼ = A∗ as left A-modules; and symmetric provided
that A ∼    ∗
        = A as A-bimodules. We start with the following easy observation

Lemma 3.1. Let A be a finite-dimensional self-injective algebra. Then LH
is a Serre functor of Dperf (A), moreover, LH ∼= ID if and only if A is
symmetric.

Proof. Let P • be a bounded complex of projective A-modules. Then we
have that LHP • = HP • is a bounded complex of injective A-modules by
the definition of H. Since A is self-injective we have HP • ∈ Dperf (A).


                                       13
That in this case LH is a Serre functor is proved for example in [Gin05,
Proposition 20.5.5(i)]. Finally, the last statement follows from the definition
of a symmetric algebra.

Definition 3.2. Given an algebra A and a projective-injective module Q,
we call Q good if the socle of Q is isomorphic to the head of Q. (Equivalently,
if Q ∼
     = ⊕λ∈Λ′ P (λ) for some Λ′ ⊂ Λ then Q ∼   = ⊕λ∈Λ′ I(λ).)

  If A has a duality which preserves simple modules, any projective-injective
module is automatically good.

Remark 3.3. In the following we will also use double centraliser properties
for the opposed algebra Aopp . Let I be a basic injective A-module. It is easy
to see that the existence of an exact sequence of the form

                           Q2 → Q1 → I → 0                                (3.2)

for some projective-injective A-modules Q1 , Q2 , is equivalent to the re-
quirement that Aopp has a double centraliser property with respect to a
projective-injective module. Indeed, the double centraliser property for Aopp
is equivalent to the existence of an exact sequence of the form

                          0 → Aopp −→ X1′ −→ X2′                          (3.3)

for some projective-injective modules X1′ , X2′ . Applying the usual duality
Homk (•, k) we get an exact sequence

                             X2 → X1 → I → 0,                             (3.4)

where I is the injective cogenerator of A−mod and X1 , X2 are projective-
injective.

3.1   A characterisation of Serre functors
The following result provides a tool to detect Serre functors:

Theorem 3.4. Let A be a finite dimensional k-algebra of finite global dimen-
sion. Assume that a basic projective-injective A-module is good and both, A
and Aopp , have the double centraliser property with respect to a projective-
injective module. Let F : A -mod → A -mod be a right exact functor. Then
LF is a Serre functor of D b (A) if and only if the following conditions are
satisfied:

(a) Its left derived functor LF : D b (A) → D b (A) is an auto-equivalence.

(b) F maps projective A-modules to injective A-modules.


                                      14
(c) F preserves the full subcategory PI of A−mod, consisting of all pro-
    jective-injective modules, and the restrictions of F and H to PI are
    isomorphic.

Proof. Let Q be a good basic projective-injective A-module. We know that
D b (A) has a Serre functor, S, and S ∼= LH, where H = A∗ ⊗A •. By
definition, H satisfies (a) and (b) and preserves PI, because Q is good.
Hence H satisfies (c).
     Now let F : A -mod → A -mod be a right exact functor, satisfying (a)–
(c). We claim that F and H are isomorphic when restricted to the category
of injective A-modules. Indeed, the double centraliser property for Aopp
gives us an exact sequence,

                              X2 → X1 → I → 0,                             (3.5)

where I is the injective cogenerator of A−mod and X1 , X2 ∈ PI (see Re-
mark 3.3). Let ψ : F → H be the isomorphism, given by (c). Applying
F and H to (3.5) and using (c) we obtain the following diagram with ex-
act rows, where the square on the left hand side commutes, inducing an
isomorphism, ψI , as indicated:

          F (X2 )             / F (X1 )           / F (I)            /0

         ψX2                  ψX1                  ψI
                                                    
         H(X2 )               / H(X1 )            / H(I)             /0

By standard arguments, it defines an isomorphism of functors, F ∼     = H, when
restricted to the full additive category of injective A-modules. Since LF is an
auto-equivalence, we have LF S ∼   = S LF . As projectives are acyclic for right
exact functors, we get an isomorphism, LF H ∼      = S F , when restricted to the
full additive subcategory given by projectives. Taking the 0-th homology we
get an isomorphism of functors

                                    FH∼
                                      =HF                                  (3.6)

when restricted to the full additive category of projective A-modules. Since
the functors F and H are right exact, we only have to deduce that F ∼= H on
the category of projectives. We already know that F and H are invertible
on PI, hence we can fix isomorphisms α : EndA (Q) ∼        = EndA (F Q) and
β : EndA (Q) ∼= EndA (HQ). When restricted to PI, we have F ∼    = IDα and
H ∼= IDβ , where IDα and IDβ denote the identity functors, but with the
EndA (Q)-action twisted by α or β respectively. Since both, F and H, are
right exact, they uniquely extend to functors on mod-EndA (Q), the latter
being realized as the full subcategory C of A -mod given by all modules,
having a presentation of the form (3.4) (see [Aus74, Section 5]). From the

                                          15
explicit description above, we obtain that both F and H are invertible as
endofunctors of C. As both, H and F , map projectives to injectives and
F ∼= H on injectives we get, together with (3.6), isomorphisms of functors
F2 ∼=HF ∼   = F H when restricted to the full additive category of projective
A-modules. This gives then rise to an isomorphism, F ∼      = H, since F is
invertible on C. So, we are done.

Proposition 3.5. Let A be a finite dimensional k-algebra of finite global
dimension. Assume there is a good basic projective-injective module Q and
set B = EndA (Q). Then the algebra B is symmetric if and only if the
restriction of the Serre functor for D b (A) to PI is the identity functor.

Proof. Let S be the Serre functor for D b (A). Then S obviously preserves PI,
because Q is good, and hence it also preserves the (homotopy) category of
bounded complexes of projective-injective A-modules. Moreover, it induces
a Serre functor on this category. By [Aus74, Section 5], the latter one
is equivalent to the category Dperf (B). The statement now follows from
Lemma 3.1.

3.2   Serre functors via partial coapproximation
In this subsection we want to show that double centraliser properties with
respect to projective-injective modules quite often make it possible to de-
scribe the Serre functor in terms of partial coapproximations.
    For the remaining section let A be a finite dimensional algebra of finite
global dimension. Let Q ∈ A -mod be a projective module. For any module
M let MQ be the trace of Q in M (ie. MQ is the smallest submodule of M
such that HomA (Q, M/MQ ) = 0). Dually let M Q be the smallest quotient
of M such that HomA (Q, M ) = HomA (Q, M Q ).
    Associated with Q, there is a right exact functor CoappQ : A -mod →
A -mod called the partial coapproximation with respect to Q (for details we
refer for example to [KM05, 2.5]). It sends a projective module P to PQ .
Note that if f : P → P ′ is a morphism between projective modules, then
it induces a morphism, CoappQ (f ) : Coapp P → Coapp(P ′ ). These as-
signments can be extended uniquely to a right exact endofunctor CoappQ
of A -mod. For an arbitrary module M ∈ A -mod, the module CoappQ M
can be constructed in the following way: We choose a short exact sequence
K ֒→ P ։ M , where P is projective. Then

                         CoappQ M ∼
                                  = (P/KQ )Q ,

in other words CoappQ M is obtained from M by first maximally extending
M using simple modules, which do not occur in the top of Q, and afterwards
deleting all occurrences of such modules in the top part.


                                     16
Lemma 3.6. Let A be a finite dimensional k-algebra. Assume, Aopp has the
double centraliser property with respect to a projective-injective module. Let
Q be a basic projective-injective A-module. Let λ ∈ Λ. Then the following
holds: If P (λ)Q ∼
                 = I(λ)Q then (CoappQ )2 (P (λ)) ∼ = I(λ).

Proof of Lemma 3.6. We have

                  (CoappQ )2 (P (λ)) ∼
                                     = CoappQ (P (λ)Q )
                                     ∼
                                     = CoappQ (I(λ)Q )
                                     ∼
                                     = I(λ).

Here, only the last isomorphism needs some explanation. If P is the projec-
tive cover of I(λ)Q then the natural surjection from I(λ) onto I(λ)Q lifts to
a map, f : P → I(λ). From the definition of I(λ)Q and (3.2) it follows that
f is surjective. The double centraliser property for Aopp (see Remark 3.3)
also implies that any composition factor in the head of the kernel of f is not
annihilated by HomA (Q, •). Hence the desired isomorphism follows.

    The following theorem describes a situation, where the double centraliser
property with respect to a basic projective-injective module Q, the descrip-
tion of the Serre functor via partial coapproximation, and the symmetry of
the endomorphism ring of Q are nicely connected. Later on we will see that
this setup applies to all the different versions of category O mentioned in
the Examples 2.7.

Theorem 3.7. Let A be a finite dimensional k-algebra of finite global di-
mension. Let Q be a basic projective-injective A-module. Assume, Q is good
and both, A and Aopp have the double centraliser property with respect to
some projective-injective module. Consider the functors V = HomA (Q, •) :
A -mod → mod-EndA (Q) and H = A∗ ⊗A •. Then the following assertions
are equivalent:

 (i) V ∼
       = VH,

 (ii) H ∼
        = (CoappQ )2 ,

(iii) EndA (Q) is symmetric.

In either of these cases, the Serre functor for D(A)b is L((CoappQ )2 ).

Proof. Obviously, if (ii) holds then L((CoappQ )2 ) is the Serre functor for
D b (A). It is left to show that the three cases are equivalent.
(i) ⇒ (ii) : Let us assume V ∼ = VH. Let P be a projective module. By the




                                     17
assumed double centraliser property for A and Aopp (see Remark 3.3) we
have natural isomorphisms
                HomA (P, P ) ∼= HomEndA (Q) (VP, VP )
                              ∼
                              = HomEndA (Q) (VHP, VP )
                              ∼
                              = HomA (HP, P ).
(for the last isomorphism we refer to the proof of (2.4)). The identity map in
EndA (P ) gives rise to a natural morphism, HP → P , identifying (HP )Q and
PQ . Since H maps the projective cover of any simple module to its injective
hull, we are in the situation of Lemma 3.6. In particular, (CoappQ )2 sends
an indecomposable projective module to the corresponding indecomposable
injective module. Let G be the right adjoint functor to CoappQ (this is the
functor of partial approximation with respect to Q, see [KM05, 2.5]). We
have the adjunction morphism ID → G2 (CoappQ )2 which we know is an
isomorphism on projective-injective modules. From the double centraliser
property we get that this adjunction morphism is injective on all projective
modules. Since (CoappQ )2 P is isomorphic to the corresponding injective
module, we have G2 (CoappQ )2 ∼    = P . In particular, G2 (CoappQ )2 ∼  = ID
when restricted to the additive subcategory given by projective modules.
Dually, (CoappQ )2 G2 ∼ = ID when restricted to the additive category given by
injective modules. Since A has finite global dimension, L((CoappQ )2 ) defines
an auto-equivalence of the derived category D b (A) with inverse RG2 . From
our assumption we have V(CoappQ )2 ∼    =V∼  = VH. Therefore, (CoappQ )2 ∼   =
H on the additive subcategory given by all projective-injective modules.
Hence (CoappQ )2 satisfies the assumptions of Theorem 3.4. It follows in
particular, H ∼ = (CoappQ )2 .
(ii) ⇒ (iii) : The definition of CoappQ implies that it induces the identity
functor on the category of projective-injective A-modules. Hence EndA (Q)
is symmetric by Proposition 3.5.
(iii) ⇒ (i) : We assume that B = EndA (Q) is symmetric. From Lemma 3.1
we have that the Serre functor of Dperf (B) is isomorphic to the identity
functor. On the other hand, the Serre functor of D b (A) induces a Serre
functor on the category of bounded complexes of projective-injective A-
modules. (Note that this category is preserved by the Serre functor, since
Q was assumed to be good.) Altogether, when restricted to the category
of projective-injective modules, the functor H is isomorphic to the identity
functor. This provides the following sequence of natural isomorphisms for
any projective A-module P :
                        VHP     ∼
                                = HomA (Q, HP )
                                ∼
                                = HomA (HQ, HP )
                                ∼ HomA (Q, P )
                                =
                                ∼
                                = VP.

                                     18
(For the penultimate isomorphism we used that H defines an auto-equivalence
of D b (A), hence it is in particular fully faithful on projectives.) Thus we get
an isomorphism of functors VH ∼     = V when restricted to the category of pro-
jective modules. Since the involved functors are right exact, the isomorphism
extends to an isomorphism of functors VH → V.


4     Applications
4.1   Bernstein-Gelfand-Gelfand category O
Let g be a semisimple complex Lie algebra with a fixed Borel subalgebra
b containing the fixed Cartan subalgebra h. Let O be the corresponding
BGG-category (see [BGG76]). Let W denote the Weyl group of g with
longest element w0 . For any weight λ ∈ h∗ let Wλ be the stabiliser Wλ =
{w ∈ W | w · λ = λ}, where w · λ = w(λ + ρ) − ρ and ρ is the half-sum
of positive roots. For µ ∈ h∗ let ∆(µ) be the Verma module with highest
weight µ. For λ ∈ h∗ , a dominant and integral weight, we consider the block
Oλ , containing the Verma modules ∆(µ), where µ ∈ W · λ. Let L(µ) be
the simple quotient of ∆(µ) and P (µ) its projective cover. For any w ∈ W ,
there is a twisting functor Tw : O → O (given by tensoring with some “semi-
regular bimodule”), see [AL03], [KM05] or [AS03] for a precise definition.
Let d be the duality on O. We denote by Gw the right adjoint functor of
Tw . We have Gw ∼  = d Tw d (see [AS03, Section 4]).
    If λ is regular, and s is a simple reflection, we denote by Cs Irving’s
shuffling functor defined as taking the cokernel of the adjunction morphism
between the identity functor and the translation θs “through the s-wall”
([GJ81, Section 3]). Let w0 = si1 si2 · · · sir be a reduced expression, then we
define Cw0 = Csir Csir−1 · · · Csi1 . Up to isomorphism, this does not depend
on the chosen reduced expression (see e.g. [MS05, Lemma 5.10]).

Proposition 4.1. Let A = Aλ such that Aλ -mod ∼
                                              = Oλ for some integral
block Oλ .

(1) The functor L (Tw0 )2 : D b (Oλ ) → D b (Oλ ) is a Serre functor.

(2) If λ is regular, then L (Cw0 )2 : D b (Oλ ) → D b (Oλ ) is a Serre functor. In
    particular, L (Tw0 )2 ∼
                          = L (Cw0 )2 .

Proof. We want to verify the assumptions of Theorem 3.4 for A = Aλ and
F = Tw2 0 considered as an endofunctor of A -mod.
    Because of the existence of a duality on A we have A ∼   = Aopp and, as
we have already mentioned in the introduction, A has a double centraliser
property with respect to the good basic projective-injective module P (w0 ·λ)
(see [Soe90, Struktursatz]). If λ is regular, the endomorphism algebra of the


                                       19
latter is the coinvariant algebra associated with W . If λ is singular then
this endomorphism ring is isomorphic to the subalgebra of Wλ -invariants in
the coinvariant algebra ([Soe90, Endomorphismensatz]). In any case, the
resulting algebra is symmetric. Consider now (Tw0 )2 : Oλ → Oλ . This
functor is both right exact and additive by definition. It’s derived functor
defines a self-equivalence of D b (Oλ ) by [AS03, Corollary 4.2] for the regular
case; the singular case follows by translation, since twisting functors com-
mute naturally with translation functors ([AS03, Theorem 3.2]). Hence the
assumption (a) of Theorem 3.4 is satisfied.
    From [AS03, (2.3) and Theorem 2.3] we have

                     F (P (λ)) = F (∆(λ)) ∼
                                          = ∇(λ) ∼
                                                 = I(λ),                   (4.1)

if λ is regular. By [AS03, Theorem 3.2], F commutes with projective func-
tors. Applying projective functors to (4.1) gives F (P (µ)) = I(µ) for any
µ ∈ W · λ. Hence, the assumption (b) of Theorem 3.4 is satisfied. It is left
to verify the assumption (c) of Theorem 3.4.
    Since the endomorphism ring of P (w0 · λ) is symmetric, by Proposi-
tion 3.5 it is left to check that Tw0 is isomorphic to the identity functor
when restricted to the category of projective-injective modules. By [KM05,
Theorem 4], there is a natural transformation, Tw0 → ID, which is an iso-
morphism, when restricted to projective-injective modules ([AS03, Propo-
sition 5.4]). In particular, the assumption (c) of Theorem 3.4 is satisfied.
Theorem 3.4 therefore implies that L(Tw0 )2 is a Serre functor of D b (Oλ ).
The first part of the proposition follows.
    Let now λ be dominant, integral and regular. We again want to apply
Theorem 3.4. The functor F = (Cw0 )2 : Oλ → Oλ is both right exact and ad-
ditive by definition. Its derived functor defines a self-equivalence of D b (Oλ )
by [MS05, Theorem 5.7]. That F (P (µ)) = I(µ) for any µ ∈ W · λ follows
inductively from [Irv93, Proposition 3.1], [MS05, Theorem 5.7, Lemma 5.2
and Proposition 5.3]. Since Endg(P (w0 · λ)) is symmetric, it is, by Propo-
sition 3.5, left to check that F is isomorphic to the identity functor when
restricted to the category of projective-injective modules. That F preserves
projective-injective modules follows from [Irv93, Theorem 4.1(1)]. From
[Soe90, Section 2.4] it follows that F commutes with the action of the
centre of A, which, because of the double centraliser and commutativity
of Endg(P (w0 · λ)), is in fact Endg(P (w0 · λ)). This implies that F , re-
stricted to the category of projective-injective modules, is isomorphic to the
identity functor. Theorem 3.4 now implies that L(Cw0 )2 is a Serre func-
tor of D b (Oλ ). From the uniqueness of Serre functors we get in particular
L (Tw0 )2 ∼
          = L (Cw0 )2 .

   We obtain the following surprising consequence:


                                       20
Corollary 4.2. Let λ be an integral, dominant and regular weight. Consid-
ered as endofunctors of Oλ , there is an isomorphism of functors (Cw0 )2 ∼
                                                                         =
(Tw0 )2 . In particular (Cw0 )2 commutes with projective functors.

Proof. The functors are isomorphic when restricted to the additive category
of projective modules, since they both give rise to a Serre functor. On the
other hand, they are both right exact and Oλ has finite global dimension.
Therefore, the isomorphism extends uniquely to the whole category Oλ .
Twisting functors commute with projective functors (see [AS03, Section 3]),
hence (Cw0 )2 commutes with projective functors as well.

Remark 4.3. We would like to draw the reader’s attention to the following
observations concerning the principal block O0 of O:

1.) The functor d Tw2 0 d is exactly Enright’s completion functor, see e.g.
    [Jos82]. This follows from [KM05, Section 3].

2.) Considered as an endofunctor of O0 , the functor Cw0 does not commute
    with the action of the centre of the universal enveloping algebra of g (or
    with the centre of O0 ) and does not commute with translation functors
    even if g = sl2 (whereas Tw0 does, see [AS03, Section 3]). This is because
    Cw0 twists the action of the centre by w0 (this follows from [Soe90, Sec-
    tion 2.4]). This means, however, that Cy−1 Cy commutes with the action
    of the centre of the category for any y ∈ W (however, not necessarily
    with projective functors).

3.) Since (Cw0 )2 induces the identity on the category of injective modules,
    it follows that (Cw0 )4 ∼
                            = (Cw0 )2 . It is easy to see that already Tw3 0 ∼
                                                                             =
    Tw0 . Moreover, the functors Cw0 , (Cw0 )2 , and Cw3 0 are pairwise non-
      2

    isomorphic; and the functors Tw0 , Tw2 0 are not isomorphic.

4.) If w0 = s1 . . . sk is a reduced decomposition, then

           L(Cw0 )2   ∼
                      = (LCs1 LCs2 · · · LCst ) (LCs1 LCs2 · · · LCst ) ,
           L(Tw0 )2   ∼
                      = (LTs1 LTs2 · · · LTst ) (LTs1 LTs2 · · · LTst ) .

    The first isomorphism follows for example from [Irv93, Proposition 3.1]
    by standard arguments. The second follows directly from [AS03, Theo-
    rem 2.2, Theorem 2.3 and Theorem 3.2].

5.) The Serre functor S for D b (O0 ) satisfies Sk ∼6 Sl for all k 6= l. Indeed,
                                                     =
    from [AS03, Corollary 6.2] it follows that S L(0) ∼
                                                 k
                                                        = L(0)[k2l(w0 )]. From
    [AS03, Corollary 6.2] it also follows that S = k  ∼
                                                      6 [l] for any k, l because
    SP (w0 · 0) ∼
                = P (w0 · 0).




                                      21
6.) The braid group acts on D b (O0 ) via the auto-equivalences LCs and via
    the auto-equivalences LTs . Since the Serre functor commutes with auto-
    equivalences, it is natural to expect that it should correspond to a central
    element in the Braid group. In fact, s1 . . . sk s1 . . . sk (see notation above)
    generates the centre of the Braid group Bn , n ≥ 3, see for example [Bir74,
    Corollary 1.8.4].

4.2     The parabolic category O in the sense of Rocha-Caridi
Our next task is to describe the Serre functor for the bounded derived cat-
egory associated with the principal block of a parabolic category O in the
sense of [RC80]. The situation here is much more complicated, since there
are in general non-isomorphic indecomposable projective-injective modules
in the same block and we do not yet know if the endomorphism ring of a
basic projective-injective module is symmetric. However, the knowledge of
the Serre functor for the bounded derived category of O0 turns out to be
extremely useful to determine the Serre functor for the parabolic situation.

     Let p ⊃ b be a parabolic subalgebra of g with corresponding Weyl group
Wp ⊂ W . Let w0p be the longest element in Wp. For any integral dominant
weight λ let Oλp be the full subcategory of Oλ given by locally p-finite objects.
This category was introduced in [RC80]. For any w ∈ W let ∆p(w·λ) denote
the corresponding parabolic Verma module with highest weight w · λ, i.e.
the maximal quotient, contained in Oλp, of the Verma module ∆(w · λ) ∈ Oλ .
Note that ∆p(w · λ) 6= 0 if and only if w is a shortest coset representative in
Wp\W .
     Let from now on λ be dominant, integral and regular. Since any object
in D b (Oλ ) for which all cohomology objects are contained in Oλp is quasi-
isomorphic to some complex of objects from Oλp (see the proof of [KS94,
Proposition 1.7.11]), D b (Oλp ) embeds as a full triangulated subcategory in
D b (Oλ ). Note that translations through walls preserve the parabolic subcat-
egory. We may therefore consider the restriction of LCw0 to this subcategory
as well as to the subcategory Oλp (considered as a subcategory of D b (Oλp )).
We get the following result:

Proposition 4.4. For any integral dominant and regular weight λ we have:

(1) The functor L(Cw0 )[−l(w0p)] maps parabolic Verma modules to parabolic
    dual Verma modules. More precisely

                   L(Cw0 )[−l(w0p)] ∆p(w · λ) ∼       p
                                              = d ∆p(w0 ww0 · λ)               (4.2)

      for any parabolic Verma module ∆p(w · λ) ∈ Oλp.

(2) The category Oλp is Ringel self-dual.

                                         22
(3) The functor L(Cw0 )2 [−2l(w0p)] maps projectives in Op to injectives in
    Op.
(4) The functor L(Cw0 )2 [−2l(w0p)] is a Serre functor for D b (Oλp ).
Proof. We first check that w0pww0 is indeed a shortest coset representative,
if so is w. Let s ∈ Wp be a simple reflection. Then

  l(sw0pww0 ) = l(w0 ) − l(sw0pw) = l(w0 ) − l(sw0p) − l(w) =
        = l(w0 ) − l(w0p) + 1 − l(w) = l(w0 ) − l(w0pw) + 1 = l(w0pww0 ) + 1.
    Let ∆p(w · λ) be a parabolic Verma module in Oλp . From [Lep77, Section
4] we have a finite resolution, P•w , of ∆p(w · λ) by Verma modules, where
                                 M
                       Piw =              ∆(yw · λ).
                               y∈Wp ,l(y)=i

The involved maps are clear up to scalars, for the exact normalisation we
refer to [Lep77, Lemma 4.1].
    For a simple reflection, s, the definition of Cs implies Cs ∆(x · λ) ∼=
∆(xs · λ) if xs > x, and Cs ∇(x · λ) ∼  = ∇(xs · λ) if xs < x. Therefore
Cw0 ∆(x · λ) ∼
             = ∇(xw0 · λ), which implies that Cw0 is exact on the category
of modules with Verma flag. This gives RCw0 ∆p(w · λ) ∼= Cw0 (P•w ). Dually,
   w p ww
d P• 0 0 is a coresolution of d ∆p(w0pww0 · λ). On the other hand, applying
Cw0 to the resolution P•w gives a complex, Q• , where
                   M                           M
         Qi =             d ∆(yww0 · λ) =             ∇(yww0 · λ)
                y∈Wp ,l(y)=i                   y∈Wp ,l(y)=i

The maps in this complex satisfy the dual version of [Lep77, Lemma 4.1].
         w p ww
Hence d P• 0 0 ∼          p
                = Q• [−l(w )]. The formula (4.2) follows.
                               0
    Let now F = Ll(w0p ) Cw0 . We claim that F , restricted to Oλp, is right exact.
Note that the formulas above imply that Li Cw0 M = 0 for any M ∈ F(∆p)
and i 6= l(w0p), in particular, for M ∈ Oλp projective. Let M ∈ Oλp be
arbitrary. Choose a short exact sequence K ֒→ P ։ M , where P ∈ Oλp is
projective. Since the global dimension of Apλ is finite, one obtains Li Cw0 M =
0 for all M and all i < l(w0p) by induction. Therefore, F is right exact. It is
                                                                        p
known (see e.g. [MS05, Lemma 5.1, Lemma 5.2]) that G = Rl(w0 ) (d Cw0 d)
is the right adjoint functor of F . From the formula (4.2) it follows that
F defines an equivalence F(∆p) ∼    = F(∇p) with inverse G. Proposition 2.2
                 p
implies that Oλ is Ringel self-dual. Applying Proposition 2.2 twice, we
get that the functor L(Cw0 )2 [−2l(w0p)] maps projective modules to injective
modules. To prove that L(Cw0 )2 [−2l(w0p)] is a Serre functor we only have
to verify the last assumption of Theorem 3.4. This is not completely trivial.
Instead of applying again Theorem 3.4 we will give an alternative argument
after the following lemma.

                                        23
    Let λ still be dominant, integral and regular. Let i : Oλp → Oλ denote the
exact inclusion functor, let Z : Oλ → Oλp be its left adjoint and Ẑ : Oλ → Oλp
be the right adjoint to i (i.e. Z is the Zuckerman functor of taking the
maximal quotient in Oλp , Ẑ ∼
                             = d Z d). To proceed we will need the following
result from folklore:

Lemma 4.5. There are isomorphisms of functors:

              d i LZ d ∼           p
                       = i LZ[−2l(w0 )] :        D b (Oλ ) → D b (Oλ )
                d LZ d ∼           p
                        = LZ[−2l(w )] :
                                    0            D b (Oλ ) → D b (Oλp )

Proof. Using [EW80, Proposition 4.2] we can fix an isomorphism,

                     d i LZ d∆(λ) ∼               p
                                  = i LZ∆(λ)[−2l(w0 )].

Since Z commutes with projective functors (see e.g. [BFK99, Proposition3]),
this isomorphism lifts to an isomorphism on projective modules. We have to
verify that it is functorial. Without loss of generality we may assume that
p = ps is the parabolic subalgebra corresponding to a simple reflection s.
The general case for arbitrary p follows then by induction. Associated to s,
there is a complex of functors

                              Ts → ID → i Z

which gives rise to a short exact sequence when applied to projective objects
([KM05, Theorem 4] and [AS03, Proposition 5.4]). Taking the left derived
functors we therefore get an isomorphism L2 (iZ) ∼ = L1 Ts (see [KS94, Propo-
sition 1.8.8]). From [AS03, Theorem 4.1] and [MS04, Theorem 1] we have
an isomorphism of functors L1 Ts ∼  = d i Z d. The first statement follows, the
second is then also clear.

   Now we are ready to complete the proof of Proposition 4.4:

Proof of the last part of Proposition 4.4. To prove that L(Cw0 )2 [−2l(w0p)] is
a Serre functor for D b (Oλp ) it is enough to show that for the functor G =
Z L2l(wp ) (Cw0 )2 i we have an isomorphisms, natural in both arguments, as
       0
follows:
                      HomOp (P p, GP p) ∼
                                        = HomOp (P p, P p)∗ ,            (4.3)
                          λ                          λ

where  Pp is a projective generator of       Oλp .
                                           Without loss of generality we
        p
assume P = ZP , where P is a projective generator of Oλ . We have isomor-




                                        24
phisms

             HomOp (P p, GP p) ∼
                               = HomOp (ZP, GP p)
                   λ                 λ
                               ∼
                               = HomOλ (i ZP, i GP p)
                               ∼
                               = HomOλ (P, L2l(w0p ) (Cw0 )2 iP p)
      (by Proposition 4.4 (1)) ∼
                               = HomDb (Oλ ) (P, L(Cw0 )2 iP p[−2l(w0 )])
                                                                       p

                               ∼                       p           2  p
                               = HomDb (Oλ ) (P [2l(w0 )], L(Cw0 ) iP )
                               ∼
          (by Proposition 4.1) = HomDb (Oλ ) (iP p, P [2l(w0p)])∗
 (by adjointness of i and dZd) ∼
                               = HomDb (Op ) (P p, d LZ dP [2l(w0 )])∗
                                                                  p
                                          λ
              (by Lemma 4.5) ∼ = HomDb (Op ) (P p, LZP )∗
                                          λ
                               ∼
                               = HomOp (P p, ZP )∗
                                     λ
                               ∼
                               = HomOp (P p, P p)∗ ,
                                            λ


which are natural in both arguments. This completes the proof of Proposi-
tion 4.4.

   As an application we get the following nontrivial result

Theorem 4.6. Let λ be an integral, regular and dominant weight. We
consider the category Oλp , where p ⊃ b is some parabolic subalgebra of g. Let
Q be a basic projective-injective module in Oλp . Then Endg(Q) is symmetric.

   For the proof we need the following

Lemma 4.7. In the situation of Theorem 4.6 we have the following: the
socle S of ∆p(λ) is simple and Homg(Q, ∆p(λ)/S) = 0.

Proof. Assume L is a composition factor of ∆p(λ) such that Homg(Q, L) 6= 0.
From the latter it follows that the projective cover, P , of L is projective-
injective, hence tilting. Since L is a composition factor of ∆p(λ), we have
Homg(∆p(λ), P ) 6= 0. Therefore, L(λ) appears as a composition factor in
P . Hence P = T p(λ) and L is unique. On the other hand

            1 = [T p(λ) : ∆p(λ)] = [P : ∆p(λ)] = [∆p(λ) : L].

Since (by [Irv85]) any simple module appearing in the socle of a parabolic
Verma module is not annihilated by Homg(Q, •), the statement follows.

Proof of Theorem 4.6. By Example 2.7 (2) and Proposition 3.5 it is enough
to prove that the Serre functor is isomorphic to the identity functor when
restricted to the additive subcategory of projective-injective modules. Let
S = L(Cw0 )2 [−2l(w0p)] be the Serre functor of D b (Oλp ). The idea of the
proof is the following: From Proposition 4.4 and Corollary 4.2 we know
that S := i L2l(wp ) (Cw0 )2 Z : Oλ → Oλ is right exact and commutes with
                  0
translations through walls, even in a natural way as defined in [Kho05].

                                     25
We will construct another right exact functor G : Oλ → Oλ which again
naturally commutes with translations through walls and coincides with S
when evaluated at ∆(λ). The main result of [Kho05] states that two right
exact additive functors, F1 , F2 : Oλ → Oλ , which agree on ∆(λ), and both
naturally commute with translations through walls, are in fact isomorphic.
From this fact we will deduce an isomorphism of functors S ∼       = G. Even more,
the main step is to show that we can choose a functor G with the additional
property that G = i G′ Z for some G′ : Oλp → Oλp , and G′ is isomorphic to
the identity functor when restricted to the category of projective-injective
modules in Oλp . Since Z is dense and full and S = i L2l(wp ) (Cw0 )2 Z ∼   = i G′ Z,
                                                                0
we get that S must be isomorphic to the identity functor on the subcategory
of Oλp formed by projective-injective modules. This will finally imply the
assertion of the theorem.
     Let’s do the work! We have S = L(Cw0 )2 [−2l(w0p)], the Serre functor of
D b (Oλp ), given by restriction of L(Cw0 )2 [−2l(w0p)] : D b (Oλ ) → D b (Oλ ). Put
S := i L2l(wp ) (Cw0 )2 Z, considered as a functor Oλ → Oλ . This functor is
               0
clearly right exact and additive. Since λ is regular, the category Oλ is a
category with full projective functors ([Kho05, Proposition 16]) in the sense
of [Kho05, Section 2], where the projective functors are given by composi-
tions of translations through walls and their direct summands. Recall from
[Kho05, Definition 2] that a functor G : Oλ → Oλ naturally commutes with
projective functors if for any projective functor θ, there is an isomorphism
of functors ϕθ : θ G ∼  = G θ such that the following holds: for any two pro-
jective functors θ1 , θ2 and any natural transformation α ∈ Hom(θ1 , θ2 ) the
following diagram commutes:
                                        αG
                            θ1 G                   / θ2 G
                                  ϕθ1             ϕθ2
                                       G(α)          
                           G θ1                   / G θ2 .

(Note the typos in the original formulation [Kho05, Definition 2].)

   Claim 1: The functor S : Oλ → Oλ naturally commutes with projective
functors.

Proof of Claim 1. To see this note first that S ∼  = L2l(w0p ) (Cw0 )2 i Z, where
L(Cw0 )2 : D b (Oλ ) → D b (Oλ ). (This is clear from the definitions.) From
[Kho05, Section 6.2] we know that i Z naturally commutes with projective
functors on Oλ . In [Kho05, Section 6.5] it is proved that twisting functors
on Oλ naturally commute with projective functors on Oλ . Corollary 4.2
gives an isomorphism (Tw0 )2 ∼  = (Cw0 )2 : Oλ → Oλ , hence (Cw0 )2 naturally
commutes with projective functors. From [Kho05, Lemma 8] it follows that


                                             26
L2l(wp ) (Cw0 )2 and L2l(wp ) (Cw0 )2 naturally commute with projective func-
     0                    0
tors, therefore so does S, because it is a composition of functors which
commute naturally with projective functors. This implies Claim 1.

    Let now J : Oλ → Oλ be the partial coapproximation with respect to
M , where M = ⊕x∈W ′ P (x · λ) and

 W ′ = {x ∈ W | ZP (x · λ) = 0 or ZP (x · λ) ∈ Oλp is projective-injective}.

Recall that, when restricted to projective objects, J is nothing else than
taking the trace with respect of M . The functor J is additive and right
exact.

   Claim 2: The functor J : Oλ → Oλ naturally commutes with projective
functors.

Proof of Claim 2. Let θ : Oλ → Oλ be a projective functor. We first show
that θ TrM P = TrM θP , via the natural inclusions

                        θ TrM P ֒→ θP ←֓ TrM θP,

for any projective module P ∈ Oλ . To see this consider the short exact
sequence TrM P ֒→ P ։ N , where N is the canonical quotient, in particular
Homg(M, N ) = 0. We claim that Homg(M, θN ) = 0. Let θ ′ be the adjoint
functor of θ. This is of course again a projective functor and therefore we
have the following: If ZP (x · λ) = 0 then 0 = θ ′ ZP (x · λ) ∼  = Zθ ′ P (x · λ).
If ZP (x · λ) 6= 0, but x ∈ W ′ , then ZP (x · λ) is projective-injective in Oλp,
hence so is θ ′ ZP (x · λ) ∼
                           = Zθ ′ P (x · λ). In particular,

    Homg(M, θN )      ∼
                      =    Homg(θ ′ M, N )
                      ֒→ Homg(M n , N )       (for some positive integer n)
                      =    0.

The definition of the trace implies that the projective cover of TrM P is a
direct summand of some M n , n ∈ Z>0 . From the arguments above it follows
that the projective cover of θ TrM P is also a direct summand of some M n ,
n ∈ Z>0 . Altogether, θ TrM P = TrM θP via the natural inclusions. In other
words, we may fix an isomorphism of functors ϕθ : θJ ∼   = Jθ, restricted to
the category of projective modules, such that

                          jθ ◦ ϕθ = θ(j) : θ J → θ,                         (4.4)

where j : J → ID is the obvious natural transformation. In particular, J
commutes with projective functors. We claim that this is already enough
to show that J naturally commutes with projective functors. We have to

                                       27
check this directly using the original definition [Kho05, Definition 2]: Let
θ1 , θ2 : Oλ → Oλ be two projective functors and let α ∈ Hom(θ1 , θ2 ) be
a natural transformation between them. Consider the following diagram of
functors restricted to the additive category formed by all projective objects:
                                                    α
                           θO1                                   / θ2
                                                                    O
                                          θ1 (j)             θ2 (j)
                                     ?            αJ              ?
                          θ1 J                                  / θ2 J

                     id                   ϕθ1                 ϕθ2         id
                                                  J(α)               
                          Jθ 1_                                / Jθ2
                                                                   _
                                          jθ1                  jθ2
                                                   α
                                                                   
                           θ1                                   / θ2 .

The two “squares”, the one on the left hand side and the on the right side,
commute because of (4.4). The squares at the top and bottom commute
by definition (of a natural transformation). We only have to show that the
middle square commutes as well, i.e. J(α) ◦ ϕθ1 = ϕθ2 ◦ αJ . Since jθ2 is
injective (on projective modules) it is enough to show that jθ2 ◦ J(α) ◦ ϕθ1 =
jθ2 ◦ ϕθ2 ◦ αJ . Since all the other parts of the diagram commute we can
calculate

                    jθ2 ◦ J(α) ◦ ϕθ1                      = α ◦ jθ1 ◦ ϕθ1
                                                          = α ◦ θ1 (j)
                                                          = θ2 (j) ◦ αJ
                                                          = jθ2 ◦ ϕθ2 ◦ αJ .

Hence, J commutes naturally with projective functors when restricted to
projective objects. Since the involved functors are right exact, Claim 2
follows.

   Claim 3: There is an isomorphism of modules S∆(λ) ∼
                                                     = i Z J i Z J∆(λ).

Proof of Claim 3. We first show that Z J∆(λ) ∼  = soc ∆p(λ), the socle of
  p
∆ (λ). Define U to be the module which fits into the canonical short exact
sequence

                   0 → U −→ ∆(λ) −→ ∆p (λ) → 0.                                (4.5)

From Lemma 4.7 we have Z J∆p(λ) =     ∼ soc ∆p(λ). On the other hand, ZU =
0 by definition, i.e. the projective cover PU of U is annihilated by Z, hence
also Z JPU = 0. Since i Z J is right exact, the sequence (4.5) implies Z JU =


                                                        28
0 and Z J∆(λ) ∼= soc ∆p(λ). From the double centraliser property we have
an exact sequence in Oλp of the form
                       0 → ∆(λ)p −→ Q1 −→ Q2 ,
where Q1 and Q2 are projective-injective modules in Oλp . There is therefore
also an exact sequence in Oλ of the form
                       Q2 → Q1 → d ∆p(λ) → 0.
Note that J Q1 = Q1 , J Q2 = Q2 . Hence i Z J d ∆p(λ) ∼ = d ∆p(λ). Al-
together we have i Z J i Z J∆p(λ) ∼
                                  = d ∆p(λ). The latter is isomorphic to
   p
S∆ (λ) by Proposition 4.4. This proves Claim 3.

   From [Kho05, Theorem 1] we get the existence of an isomorphism
                            α : iZJ iZJ ∼
                                        = S.
By definition, J is isomorphic to the identity functor when restricted to
projective-injectives in Oλp . Therefore, α induces an isomorphism of functors
                         ID ∼
                            = L(Cw0 )2 [−2l(w0 )]
                                             p


when restricted to the category of projective-injective modules in Oλp . This
is exactly the statement that the Serre functor for D b (Oλp ) is isomorphic to
the identity when restricted to the additive category formed by projective-
injective modules. The assertion of the theorem follows then finally from
Proposition 3.5.

   We get the following consequence
Corollary 4.8. In the situation of Theorem 4.6 the Serre functor for D b (Oλp )
is isomorphic to L((CoappQ )2 )
Proof. This follows directly from Theorem 4.6 and Theorem 3.7.

4.3   Harish-Chandra bimodules
Let λ Hµ be the category of Harish-Chandra bimodules as in Examples 2.7(3),
where λ and µ are integral and dominant. Recall the subcategory λ Hµ ∼   =
  µ                                                                    1
Aλ -mod. In [BG80] (see also [Jan83, 6.17, 6.23]) it is proved that λ Hµ is
equivalent to the full subcategory Cλµ of Oλ given by all modules M , which
have an exact presentation,
                             P1 → P2 → M → 0,                             (4.6)
where P1 and P2 are projective and the simple modules in their heads are
of the form L(x · λ), where x is a longest coset representative in Wµ \W/Wλ .
Note that this category does not have finite global dimension in general.
Nevertheless we have the following

                                      29
Proposition 4.9. Let λ, µ be integral dominant weights. Then

(1) Aµλ is Ringel self-dual.

(2) Dperf (Aµλ ) has a Serre functor, namely L(Cw0 )2 (via the identification
    of Cλµ with Aµλ -mod given by [Aus74, Section 5]).

Proof. From [MS05, Proposition 4.2] and its dual version we get that Cw0
maps standard modules to costandard modules. From [MS05, Lemma 5.18]
it follows that Cw0 defines an equivalence between the categories of mod-
ules with standard flag and modules with costandard flag. In particular,
Ext1Aµ (Cw0 P, ∇) ∼= Ext1Aµ (P, Cw−1
                                   0
                                     ∇) = 0 for any costandard module ∇ and
      λ                   λ
any projective P . Hence Cw0 maps a minimal projective generator to a char-
acteristic cotilting module, which is tilting (see e.g. [FKM00, Section 6]).
Since it is an equivalence, it preserves the endomorphism ring. The first
part of the theorem follows.
    To prove the second part of the theorem we use Proposition 4.1. Because
of this result and [Gin05, Proposition 20.5.5(i)] it is enough to show that
L(Cw0 )2 preserves Dperf (Aµλ ). Since L(Cw0 )2 is a Serre functor for O, it sends
indecomposable projective modules to the corresponding indecomposable
injective modules. However, an injective Aµλ -module has a presentation of
the form (4.6) by [MS05, Corollary 2.11]. Since all tilting Aµλ -modules are
also cotilting ([FKM00, Section 6]), it follows that injective Aµλ -modules
have finite projective dimension. Hence L(Cw0 )2 preserves Dperf (Aµλ ) and
the statement follows.

Remark 4.10. From [Dla96, Theorem 2.5] it follows that Aµλ has finite
global dimension if and only if the standard and proper standard Aµλ -modules
coincide (i.e. Aµλ is quasi-hereditary). Using the description of standard
modules as in [MS05, Proposition 2.18] it is easy to see that this is the case
if and only if µ is regular or Aµλ is semi-simple.

Remark 4.11. One can also show that for any N, P ∈ Aµλ -mod, where P is
projective, the Serre functor L(Cw0 )2 from Proposition 4.1 induces a natural
isomorphism,
                   HomAµ (N, (Cw0 )2 P ) ∼
                                         = HomAµ (P, N )∗ .
                          λ                         λ


4.4   The category O for rational Cherednik algebras
We briefly recall the facts about rational Cherednik algebras which are im-
portant in our setup. We refer for example to [GGOR03] for details. Let
V be a finite dimensional vector space, W ⊂ GL(V ) a finite reflection group,
and C[W] the group algebra of W over C. Let A denote the set of reflection
hyperplanes. If h ∈ A then Wh denotes the (pointwise) stabiliser of h in W.
Let γ : A → C[W] be a W-equivariant map such that γ(h) ∈ C[Wh ] ⊂ C[W].

                                       30
Associated to the pair (V, γ) we have H = H(V, γ), the corresponding ra-
tional Cherednik algebra as defined and studied for example in [GGOR03].
As a vector space, H(V, γ) is isomorphic to S(V ) ⊗ C[W] ⊗ S(V ∗ ), where
S(V ) denotes the algebra of polynomial functions in V ∗ (This is the PBW-
theorem [EG02, Theorem 1.3]). The occurring three algebras S(V ), S(V ∗ )
and C[W] are in fact subalgebras, for the nontrivial commutator relations
between them (involving the parameter γ) we refer to [GGOR03], [Gua03].
Let O = O(H, V, γ) be the corresponding category O given by all finitely
generated H-modules which are locally S(V ∗ )-finite. This is a highest weight
category, where the isomorphism classes of simple modules are in natural
bijection with irreducible modules for W. More precisely, if E is an irre-
ducible W-module, then ∆(E) = H(V, γ) ⊗B E, where B is the subalgebra
of H(V, γ) generated by S(V ∗ ) and C[W]. (The action of p ∈ S(V ∗ ) on E is
given by multiplication with p(0)). The simple head L(E) of ∆(E) is the
simple module corresponding to E.
                                                                           opp
    In general, H(V, γ) is not isomorphic to its opposite algebra H(V, γ) ,
therefore there is no simple preserving duality. However, we have an iso-
morphism ([GGOR03, Section 4.2]) of algebras H(V, γ) ∼     = H(V ∗ , † ◦ γ)opp ,
where † : W → W, g 7→ g−1 (the isomorphism is given by extending † trivially
to S(V ⋆ ) and sending v ∈ V to −v).
    With this fixed isomorphism one can define two contravariant functors,
namely

   • the naive duality ([GGOR03, Proposition 4.7]):

                          dV,γ : O(V, γ) → O(V ∗ , † ◦ γ)

      by sending an object M to the largest submodule dV,γ (M ) of (the
      ordinary vector space dual) M ∗ which is locally S(V ∗ )-finite. This
      is a right H(V, γ)-module and becomes a left H(V ∗ , † ◦ γ)-module via
      the fixed isomorphism. This duality sends the simple module L(E)
      to the simple module L(Ě) indexed by the dual representation Ě of
      E. Projective objects are sent to injectives and standard objects to
      costandard objects.

   • the functor DV,γ (see [GGOR03, Proposition 4.10])

             DV,γ = Extdim V
                       H(V,γ) (•, H(V, γ)) : O(V, γ) → O(V, † ◦ γ).


Conjecture 4.12. Let H(V, γ) be a rational Cherednik algebra with the cor-
responding category O(V, γ). Then

                      S = dV ∗ ,γ † DV ∗ ,γ dV,†◦γ DV,γ

is right exact and LS is a Serre functor.

                                       31
    To prove this conjecture it would be enough to verify the assumptions
in Theorem 3.4, where F = F1 F2 , F1 = dV,†◦γ DV,γ and F2 = dV ∗ ,γ † DV ∗ ,γ .
The fact that F is right exact follows directly from [GGOR03, 4.1]. The
assumption (a) follows directly from [GGOR03, Lemma 4.1, Proposition
4.7]. The assumption (b) is proved in [GGOR03, Proposition 5.21]. We
do not know if assumption (c) is satisfied. However, a positive answer
to the conjecture [GGOR03, Remark 5.20] would imply, via the Knizhnik-
Zamolodchikov-functor, that F is isomorphic to the identity functor on the
additive subcategory given by projective-injective objects. Since the corre-
sponding Hecke algebra is symmetric (see e.g. [CIK71, Lemma 5.10]), the
conjecture would follow from Proposition 3.5.

    Independently of the Conjecture 4.12, we can at least give a description
of the corresponding Serre functor in terms of partial coapproximation:

Proposition 4.13. Let H(V, γ) be a rational Cherednik algebra with the
corresponding category O(V, γ). Let Q be a basic projective-injective mod-
ule in O(V, γ). Then the Serre functor of D b (O(V, γ)) is isomorphic to
L((CoappQ )2 ).

Proof. We only have to verify that we are in the situation of Theorem 3.7.
We can find a projective-injective module PKZ representing the Knizhnik-
Zamolodchikov-functor (see [GGOR03, Proposition 5.21]). On the other
hand the endomorphism ring of PKZ is isomorphic to the Hecke algebra
([GGOR03, Theorem 5.15]), hence symmetric ([CIK71]). It is known that
O(V, γ) has the double centraliser property with respect to PKZ ([GGOR03,
Theorem 5.16]). Since the naive duality maps a basic projective module to
a basic injective module, and PKZ to the corresponding PKZ ([GGOR03,
Proposition 5.21]), and O(V, γ)opp has again a double centraliser property
with respect to PKZ , we get that A and Aopp have the double centraliser with
respect to a basic projective-injective module. From [GGOR03, Proposition
5.21] it follows that such a basic projective-injective module for A is good.
Hence, the assumptions of Theorem 3.7 are satisfied. The statement follows.



5    Projective-injectives in the category Op (sln (C))
In the following section we study more carefully projective-injective modules
in the parabolic category Op, especially, for the Lie algebra sln = sln (C). As
already mentioned in the introduction, one of the motivations to consider
the category of projective-injective modules in Op is to find a precise connec-
tion between Khovanov’s categorification of the Jones polynomial ([Kho00])
and the categorification of the Jones polynomial via representation theory


                                      32
of the Lie algebra sln (as proposed in [BFK99] and proved in [Str05]). It
might be possible to pass directly from one model to the other by connect-
ing the involved algebras directly, because the algebra, used by Khovanov
in his categorification, is a quotient of an algebra A such that A -mod is
equivalent to a certain block of Op for some sln ([Bra02, page 494]). Al-
though, we have a very nice, more or less explicit, description of the algebra
A in question ([Bra02, Theorem 1.4.1]), we are interested in more concep-
tual properties of the algebra. Several conjectures in this direction were
formulated by Khovanov in [Kho04]. We want to simplify the problem by
using the double centraliser property. In this way, by using the Serre func-
tor, we confirm three conjectures of Khovanov: in Theorem 5.2 we confirm
[Kho04, Conjecture 4] concerning the centre of A, and in Theorem 5.4 we
confirm that the endomorphism algebra of a basic projective-injective mod-
ule is symmetric, and depends only on the chosen partition of n, not on the
actually chosen composition of n. (The last two conjectures were formulated
in a private communication). Furthermore, Theorem 5.4 supports [Kho04,
Conjecture 3].

5.1    On a result of Irving
Consider the classical triangular decomposition sln = n− ⊕h⊕n+ , where h is
the Cartan subalgebra of all diagonal matrices (with zero trace) and n± de-
notes the subalgebra of all upper- and lower-triangular matrices respectively.
Given a composition, µ = (µ1 , . . . , µk ), of n (i.e. µ1 + · · · + µk = n), we have
the corresponding Young subgroup Sµ = Sµ1 × Sµ2 × · · · × Sµk of Sn , the
latter being the Weyl group of sln . Let O0µ be the corresponding parabolic
subcategory of O0 (sln ) (see Section 4.2). Recall that the simple objects in
O0 are in bijection with the elements of Sn . We denote by L(w) the simple
module of highest weight w(ρ) − ρ, where ρ denotes the half-sum of the
positive roots. For w ∈ Sn we denote by ∆(w) and P (w) the corresponding
Verma and indecomposable projective module in O0 . Let S µ be the set of
shortest coset representatives of Sµ \Sn and let wµ be the longest element
in S µ . The simple objects in O0µ are then the L(w), where w ∈ S µ . For
w ∈ S µ we denote by Lµ (w), ∆µ (w) and P µ (w) the corresponding simple,
parabolic Verma and indecomposable projective module in O0µ respectively.
Note that Lµ (w) = L(w) for w ∈ S µ .
    For any i ∈ {1, . . . , n − 1} we denote by θi : O0 → O0 the translation
functor through the si -wall (see e.g. [GJ81, Section 3]). This functor is
exact, self-adjoint, and preserves O0µ . For w ∈ Sn we denote by L(w) the
left cell of the element w (for a definition we refer to [KL79]). Now we can
give (for the sln case) an easier proof for the following main result of [Irv85]:

Theorem 5.1. For any composition, µ, of n the following conditions are


                                         33
equivalent:

 (i) P µ (w) is injective.

 (ii) w ∈ L(wµ )

(iii) Lµ (w) occurs in the socle of some parabolic Verma module ∆µ (w′ ).

Proof. Assume that (i) is satisfied. Since O0µ has a simple preserving duality,
if P µ (w) is injective, it is a tilting module in the highest weight category
O0µ and hence is self-dual. This means that its socle is Lµ (w), which must
coincide with the socle of some parabolic Verma module because P µ (w) has
a standard flag. This implies (iii).
    Assume that (iii) is satisfied. Since any parabolic Verma module is a
submodule of some tilting module, we get that Lµ (w) occurs in the socle of
some tilting module. By [CI89], the tilting modules in O0µ are exactly direct
summands of translations of Lµ (wµ ). From [Irv85, Proposition 4.3] (this is
an easy preparatory result) it follows that w ∈ L(wµ ), that is (ii) is satisfied.
    Assume that (ii) is satisfied. Since all P µ (w′ ), w′ ∈ L(wµ ), can be
obtained from each other via translations through walls (this follows again
from [Irv85, Proposition 4.3]), it is now left to show that there exists w ∈
L(wµ ) such that P µ (w) is injective. Actually, since we already know that (i)
implies (ii), it is enough to show that there exists some projective-injective
module in O0µ . But this one is obtained by translating any simple projective
module from the same weight lattice, which exists by [IS88, 3.1] (this is
again an easy result).

5.2   On Khovanov’s conjectures
According to Theorem 5.1, the modules P µ (w), w ∈ L(wµ ), constitute an
exhaustive list of indecomposable projective-injective modules in O0µ . Let
                    µ
       L
Pµ =      w∈L(wµ ) P (w) be the basic projective-injective module and set
Bµ = EndO0µ (Pµ ). As a consequence, we have the following result which
confirms [Kho04, Conjecture 4]:

Theorem 5.2. Let µ be a composition of n.

(1) The Loewy lengths of all projective-injective modules in O0µ coincide.

(2) O0µ satisfies the double centraliser property with respect to a basic projec-
    tive-injective module, in particular, the restriction induces an isomor-
    phism between the centres of Aµ0 and Bµ .

Remark 5.3. Theorem 5.2 is true for any semisimple complex Lie algebra
g (the proof is exactly the same if one replaces Theorem 5.1 by the main
result of [Irv85]).

                                       34
Proof. Let P µ (w) be a projective-injective module. From [Irv85, Proposi-
tion 4.3(ii)] it follows that P µ (w) is a direct summand of some translation of
P µ (wµ ). Hence to prove the first statement it is enough to show that transla-
tions through walls do not increase the Loewy length of projective-injective
modules. If θi (L(w)) 6= 0, then
       dim HomO (θi P µ (w), L(w)) = dim HomO (P µ (w), θi L(w)) = 2
by [Jan83, 4.12(3), 4.13(3’)], which implies that P µ (w) ⊕ P µ (w) is a direct
summand of θi (P µ (w)). Comparing the lengths of the standard filtrations
we even get θi (P µ (w)) ∼
                         = P µ (w) ⊕ P µ (w), in particular, such translations do
not produce new projective-injective modules.
    Now assume that θi (L(w)) = 0. The algebras A0 and Aµ0 , which corre-
spond to O0 and O0µ are Koszul ([Soe90], [BGS96], [Bac99]), in particular,
they admit a canonical positive grading (the Koszul grading), which we fix.
This allows us to consider graded versions of both O0 and O0µ (see [BGS96],
[Str03a]). In [Str03a] and [BGS96] it was shown that simple modules, Verma
modules, parabolic Verma and projective modules in O0 and O0µ are grad-
able. Their graded lifts are unique up to isomorphism and grading shift,
therefore we call a lift standard if the head is concentrated in degree zero.
In [Str03a] it was shown, that the functors θi (as endofunctors of O0 ) are
gradable as well. We denote by θ̃i the standard graded lift of θi (i.e. θ̃i ,
applied to a simple module concentrated in degree 0 has socle concentrated
in degree 1). Since θi preserves O0µ , the functor θ̃i restricts to a graded lift
of θi on O0µ .
    Let P gr be the standard graded lift of P µ (w). Since it has both sim-
ple top and simple socle, the radical-, socle- and graded filtrations of P gr
coincide by [BGS96, Proposition 2.4.1]. In particular, P gr has a unique
component of maximal and a unique component of minimal degree. On
the other hand, θ̃i (L) is concentrated in the degrees −1, 0, 1 for any simple
module L, concentrated in degree 0 ([Str03a, Theorem 5.1]). This implies
that the length of the graded filtration of θ̃i (P gr ) can not exceed the length
of the graded filtration of P gr . Hence, the Loewy length of θi (P µ (w)) does
not exceed that of P µ (w) and the statement (1) follows.
    The double centraliser property follows from Corollary 2.6 and the main
result of [Irv85] (as formulated in Theorem 5.1). For an algebra, A, we
denote its centre by Z(A). From the double centraliser property we have
                               Aµ0 = EndBµ (Pµ ).
If x ∈ Z(Aµ0 ), then xa = ax for all a ∈ Aµ0 and hence x ∈ Bµ . On the other
hand, every element of Aµ0 commutes with each element in Bµ by definition.
Hence x ∈ Z(Bµ ). This implies Z(Aµ0 ) ֒→ Z(Bµ ). Because of the left-right
symmetry of the double centraliser we finally get Z(Aµ0 ) = Z(Bµ ). This
completes the proof.

                                       35
   We formulate now the main result of this section:
Theorem 5.4. (1) Let µ be a composition of n. Then the algebra Bµ is
   symmetric.

(2) Let µ and ν be two compositions of n, which give rise to the same par-
    tition of n. Then Bµ ∼
                         = Bν .
Proof. The statement (1) is just a special case of Theorem 4.6.
    Let us now prove (2). Without loss of generality we may assume µ =
(µ1 , . . . , µk ) and

                     ν = (µ1 , . . . , µl−1 , µl+1 , µl , µl+2 , . . . , µk )

for some l ∈ {1, . . . , k − 1}. Moreover, we assume µl > µl+1 .
     For any composition, τ , of n Irving and Shelton constructed in [IS88,
3.1] a special weight, λ(τ ), with the following property: the simple highest
weight module L(λ(τ ) − ρ) with the highest weight λ(τ ) − ρ is the only
simple module in its block of Oτ . From the definition in [IS88, 3.1] it follows
immediately that, if τ and τ ′ are two compositions of n which give rise to the
same partition, then λ(τ ) and λ(τ ′ ) are in the same Sn -orbit, in particular,
L(λ(τ ) − ρ) and L(λ(τ ′ ) − ρ) belong to the same block of O.
     Now we apply this to the case τ = ν, τ ′ = µ. Let Oξ be the common block
(of O) for L(λ(µ)−ρ) and L(λ(ν)−ρ). Although L(λ(µ)−ρ) and L(λ(ν)−ρ)
are in the same block of O, we have that the parabolic categories Oξµ and Oξν
are semi-simple containing only one simple object each. Obviously, they are
equivalent. However, we would like to construct a functor on O, which gives
rise to an equivalence between these categories, and, additionally, commutes
with tensoring with finite-dimensional sln -modules.
     To proceed we will need some general notation. For any transposition
s = si = (i, i + 1) in Sn we set Os = Oβ , where β = (β1 , . . . , βn−1 ) is the
composition of n such that βi = 2 and βj = 1 for all j 6= i. Denote by
is : Os ֒→ O the inclusion functor, and by Zs : O → Os the left adjoint to
is , which is the Zuckerman functor, associated to s. Then d Zs d : Os ֒→ O
is the right adjoint to is . It is known that

               Li Zs = 0 for all i ≥ 3,          and       LZs ∼
                                                               = d LZs d[2],           (5.1)

see [EW80] or [BFK99, Proposition 3] and also Lemma 4.5. Finally, we
denote by iµ : Oµ ֒→ O and iν : Oν ֒→ O the inclusion functors and by
Zµ : O → Oµ and Zν : O → Oν the corresponding left adjoint Zuckerman
functors.
    Let m′ = m′l = µ1 + · · · + µl−1 and m = ml = m′ + µl+1 , and set
r = µl − µl+1 . Consider the following element in Sn :

 w = (sm′ +r+1 . . . sm+r ) . . . (sm′ +2 . . . sm+1 sm′ +1 )(sm′ +1 sm′ +2 . . . sm−1 sm ).

                                               36
(for example if µ = (2, 4) then ν = (4, 2) and we have w = (s2 s3 )(s1 s2 )).
For simplicity we write the above product in the form w = t1 . . . tp (thus
p = rµl+1 , t1 = sm′ +r+1 and so on). For i = 1, . . . , p we set wi = ti . . . tp ,
and wp+1 = e. The element w is constructed such that w(λ(ν)) = λ(µ) and
wi (λ(ν)) > wi+1 (λ(ν)) for all i = 1, . . . , p. Define

 F = LZµ it1 LZt1 it2 LZt2 . . . itp LZtp iν [−l(w)]     : D b (Oν ) → D b (Oµ ),
 G = LZν itp LZtp itp−1 LZtp−1 . . . it1 LZt1 iµ [−l(w)] : D b (Oµ ) → D b (Oν ).

Both, F and G, commute with tensoring with finite-dimensional sln -modules
([EW80, Proposition 2.2 and Proposition 3.7], see also [BFK99, Proposi-
tion 3]). Further, F is both left and right adjoint to G by (5.1).

   Claim: The functors F and G define, via restriction, mutually inverse
equivalences F : Oξν → Oξµ and G : Oξµ → Oξν .

Proof of the Claim. Since F and G are adjoint to each other and both Oξµ
and Oξν are semi-simple, it is enough to show that

                         F (L(λ(ν) − ρ)) = L(λ(µ) − ρ).

    To prove this we first note that for a simple reflection, s, and for a
dominant integral weight, λ, we have
                         
                         L(x
                              · λ) ⊕ L(x · λ)[2],               sx · λ < x · λ,
   LZs (L(x · λ)) =                         a
                           L
                             y:y>sx L(y · λ) [1],                sx · λ = x · λ,
                                             y
                         
                                                         a
                                          L
                           L(sx · λ)[1] ⊕ y:y>sx L(y · λ) y [1], otherwise,
                         
                                                                              (5.2)
where ay ∈ {0, 1, . . . }. To see this, let Ts : O → O be the twisting func-
tor, associated with s (as in Subsection 4.1). In [KM05, Theorem 4] (see
also [MS04, Proposition 2.3]) it is shown that there exists a natural trans-
formation, cans : Ts → ID, non-vanishing on Verma modules. In [MS04,
Theorem 1(3)] it is proved that the kernel of cans is isomorphic to L1 Zs .
Now (5.2) follows from the Kazhdan-Lusztig conjectures, see [AS03, Theo-
rem 6.3 and Theorem 7.8] for details. (Note that the assumption for L′ to
be s-finite is missing in the formulation of [AS03, Theorem 6.3(3)].)
    For i = 1, . . . , p set

      Fi = LZti it2 LZt2 . . . itp LZtp iν [−(p − i + 1)] : D b (Oν ) → D b (Oti ).

From (5.2) it follows by induction that
                                                    M                    (i)
        Fi L(λ(τ ) − ρ) = L(wi (λ(τ )) − ρ) ⊕               L(y · λ(τ ))ay [b(i)
                                                                             y ],
                                                   y:y>wi



                                           37
         (i)               (i)
where ay ∈ {0, 1, . . . }, by ∈ {1, . . . } for all i. In particular, we have
                      LZµ it1 F1 L(λ(τ ) − ρ) = L(λ(µ) − ρ)
since Oξµ is semi-simple and the claim follows.

    Let us now sum up what we know. We have an adjoint pair, (F, G), of
functors between D b (Oν ) and D b (Oµ ), which commute with tensoring with
finite-dimensional sln -modules and induce mutually inverse equivalences,
when restricted to Oξν and Oξµ . On the other hand, there is a finite di-
mensional sln -module, E, such that E ⊗ L(λ(ν) − ρ) contains Pν as a direct
summand, and E ⊗ L(λ(µ) − ρ) contains Pµ as a direct summand (this
follows from Theorem 5.2, for the explicit statement see [Irv85, Proposi-
tion 4.3(ii)]). Therefore the adjunction morphisms F G → ID and ID → GF
are isomorphisms when evaluated at Pµ and Pν respectively. Hence F and
G define mutually inverse equivalences between the corresponding additive
categories of projective-injective modules. This completes the proof of The-
orem 5.4.

    We have the following direct consequence, a part of which was also ob-
tained in [Kho04, Section 6] by establishing a derived equivalence between
Oξµ and Oξν using a geometric argument:
Corollary 5.5. The centres of Bµ , Bν , Oξµ and Oξν are all isomorphic.
Remark 5.6. Since the Kazhdan-Lusztig left cell modules for the Iwahori-
Hecke algebra Hn of the symmetric group are exactly the irreducible mod-
ules, Theorem 5.1 can be used to “categorify” these irreducible modules:
Let λ be a partition of n. Consider the abelian category of modules, admit-
ting a 2-step presentation by projective-injective modules in the parabolic
category O for sln , associated with λ. This abelian category is invariant
under the action of translations through walls. The action of these transla-
tion functors gives rise to a categorification of the Specht module Sλ for the
symmetric group Sn . The graded version of the above result (in the sense
of [Str03a]) gives rise to a categorification of the Specht module Sλ for Hn .
The details will appear in [KMS].


References
[ÁHLU00] I. Ágoston, D. Happel, E. Lukács, and L. Unger, Finitistic di-
          mension of standardly stratified algebras, Comm. Algebra 28
          (2000), no. 6, 2745–2752.
[AL03]         H. H. Andersen and N. Lauritzen, Twisted Verma modules,
               Studies in memory of Issai Schur, Progr. Math., vol. 210,
               Birkhäuser, 2003, pp. 1–26.

                                        38
[AR91]    M. Auslander and I. Reiten, Applications of contravariantly fi-
          nite subcategories, Adv. Math. 86 (1991), no. 1, 111–152.

[Ark97]   S. M. Arkhipov, Semi-infinite cohomology of associative algebras
          and bar duality, Internat. Math. Res. Notices (1997), no. 17,
          833–863.

[AS03]    H. H. Andersen and C. Stroppel, Twisting functors on O, Rep-
          resent. Theory 7 (2003), 681–699 (electronic).

[Aus74]   M. Auslander, Representation theory of Artin algebras. I, II,
          Comm. Algebra 1 (1974), 177–268.

[Bac99]   E. Backelin, Koszul duality for parabolic and singular category
          O, Represent. Theory 3 (1999), 139–152 (electronic).

[BBM04]   A. Beilinson, R. Bezrukavnikov, and I. Mirković, Tilting exer-
          cises, Mosc. Math. J. 4 (2004), no. 3, 547–557, 782.

[BFK99]   J. Bernstein, I. Frenkel, and M. Khovanov, A categorification
          of the Temperley-Lieb algebra and Schur quotients of U (sl2 )
          via projective and Zuckerman functors, Selecta Math. (N.S.) 5
          (1999), no. 2, 199–241.

[BG80]    J. N. Bernstein and S. I. Gel′ fand, Tensor products of finite- and
          infinite-dimensional representations of semisimple Lie algebras,
          Compositio Math. 41 (1980), no. 2, 245–285.

[BGG76]   I. N. Bernstein, I. M. Gel′ fand, and S. I. Gel′ fand, A certain
          category of g-modules, Funkcional. Anal. i Priložen. 10 (1976),
          no. 2, 1–8.

[BGS96]   A. Beilinson, V. Ginzburg, and W. Soergel, Koszul duality pat-
          terns in representation theory, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 9 (1996),
          no. 2, 473–527.

[Bir74]   J. S. Birman, Braids, links, and mapping class groups, Princeton
          University Press, 1974, Annals of Mathematics Studies, No. 82.

[BK89]    A. I. Bondal and M. M. Kapranov, Representable functors, Serre
          functors, and reconstructions, Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR Ser. Mat.
          53 (1989), no. 6, 1183–1205, 1337.

[Bra02]   T. Braden, Perverse sheaves on Grassmannians, Canad. J.
          Math. 54 (2002), no. 3, 493–532.




                                    39
[CI89]    D. H. Collingwood and R. S. Irving, A decomposition theorem
          for certain self-dual modules in the category O, Duke Math. J.
          58 (1989), no. 1, 89–102.

[CIK71]   C. W. Curtis, N. Iwahori, and R. Kilmoyer, Hecke algebras and
          characters of parabolic type of finite groups with (B, N )-pairs,
          Inst. Hautes Études Sci. Publ. Math. (1971), no. 40, 81–116.

[CPS88]   E. Cline, B. Parshall, and L. Scott, Finite-dimensional alge-
          bras and highest weight categories, J. Reine Angew. Math. 391
          (1988), 85–99.

[CPS96]          , Stratifying endomorphism algebras, Mem. Amer. Math.
          Soc. 124 (1996), no. 591.

[Dla96]   V. Dlab, Quasi-hereditary algebras revisited, An. Ştiinţ. Univ.
          Ovidius Constanţa Ser. Mat. 4 (1996), no. 2, 43–54, Represen-
          tation theory of groups, algebras, and orders (Constanţa, 1995).

[Dla00]         , Properly stratified algebras, C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris Sér.
          I Math. 331 (2000), no. 3, 191–196.

[DR89]    V. Dlab and C. M. Ringel, Quasi-hereditary algebras, Illinois J.
          Math. 33 (1989), no. 2, 280–291.

[DX94]    B. Deng and C. Xi, Quasi-hereditary algebras which are dual
          extensions of algebras, Comm. Algebra 22 (1994), no. 12, 4717–
          4735.

[EG02]    P. Etingof and V. Ginzburg, Symplectic reflection algebras,
          Calogero-Moser space, and deformed Harish-Chandra homomor-
          phism, Invent. Math. 147 (2002), no. 2, 243–348.

[EW80]    T. J. Enright and N. R. Wallach, Notes on homological algebra
          and representations of Lie algebras, Duke Math. J. 47 (1980),
          no. 1, 1–15.

[FKM00]   V. Futorny, S. König, and V. Mazorchuk, S-subcategories in O,
          Manuscripta Math. 102 (2000), no. 4, 487–503.

[Fri04]   A. Frisk, Dlab’s theorem and tilting modules for stratified alge-
          bras, Tech. report, University of Uppsala, 2004.

[Gab62]   P. Gabriel, Des catégories abéliennes, Bull. Soc. Math. France
          90 (1962), 323–448.




                                   40
[GGOR03] V. Ginzburg, N. Guay, E. Opdam, and R. Rouquier, On the
         category O for rational Cherednik algebras, Invent. Math. 154
         (2003), no. 3, 617–651.

[Gin05]   V. Ginzburg,    Lectures on        noncommutative     geometry,
          arXiv:math.AG/0506603, 2005.

[GJ81]    O. Gabber and A. Joseph, Towards the Kazhdan-Lusztig conjec-
          ture, Ann. Sci. École Norm. Sup. (4) 14 (1981), no. 3, 261–302.

[Gua03]   N. Guay, Projective modules in the category O for the Cherednik
          algebra, J. Pure Appl. Algebra 182 (2003), no. 2-3, 209–221.

[Hap88]   D. Happel, Triangulated categories in the representation the-
          ory of finite-dimensional algebras, London Mathematical Society
          Lecture Note Series, vol. 119, Cambridge University Press, 1988.

[Hap91]           , Auslander-Reiten triangles in derived categories of
          finite-dimensional algebras, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 112 (1991),
          no. 3, 641–648.

[Irv85]   R. Irving, Projective modules in the category OS : self-duality,
          Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 291 (1985), no. 2, 701–732.

[Irv93]          , Shuffled Verma modules and principal series modules
          over complex semisimple Lie algebras, J. London Math. Soc. (2)
          48 (1993), no. 2, 263–277.

[IS88]    R. S. Irving and B. Shelton, Loewy series and simple projective
          modules in the category OS , Pacific J. Math. 132 (1988), no. 2,
          319–342.

[Jan83]   J. C. Jantzen, Einhüllende Algebren halbeinfacher Lie-Algebren,
          Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete (3), vol. 3,
          Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1983.

[Jos82]   A. Joseph, The Enright functor on the Bernstein-Gel′ fand-
          Gel′ fand category O, Invent. Math. 67 (1982), no. 3, 423–445.

[Kho00]   M. Khovanov, A categorification of the Jones polynomial, Duke
          Math. J. 101 (2000), no. 3, 359–426.

[Kho04]          , Crossingless matchings and the cohomology of (n, n)
          Springer varieties, Commun. Contemp. Math. 6 (2004), no. 4,
          561–577.

[Kho05]   O. Khomenko, Categories with projective functors, Proc. London
          Math. Soc. (3) 90 (2005), no. 3, 711–737.

                                  41
[KK99]    M. Klucznik and S. König, Characteristic tilting modules over
          Quasi-hereditary algebras, SFB343 Universität Bielefeld, 1999.

[KL79]    D. Kazhdan and G. Lusztig, Representations of Coxeter groups
          and Hecke algebras, Invent. Math. 53 (1979), no. 2, 165–184.

[KM02]    S. König and V. Mazorchuk, Enright’s completions and injec-
          tively copresented modules, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 354 (2002),
          no. 7, 2725–2743 (electronic).

[KM05]    O. Khomenko and V. Mazorchuk, On Arkhipov’s and Enright’s
          functors, Math. Z. 249 (2005), no. 2, 357–386.

[KMS]     M. Khovanov, V. Mazorchuk, and C. Stroppel, Categorifica-
          tion of irreducible representations of symmetric groups and their
          Hecke algebras, in preparation.

[KS94]    M. Kashiwara and P. Schapira, Sheaves on manifolds, Grund-
          lehren der Mathematischen Wissenschaften, vol. 292, Springer-
          Verlag, 1994.

[KSX01]   S. König, I. H. Slungard, and C. Xi, Double centralizer proper-
          ties, dominant dimension, and tilting modules, J. Algebra 240
          (2001), no. 1, 393–412.

[Lep77]   J. Lepowsky, A generalization of the Bernstein-Gelfand-Gelfand
          resolution, J. Algebra 49 (1977), no. 2, 496–511.

[MS04]    V. Mazorchuk and C. Stroppel, On functors associated to a sim-
          ple root, arXiv:math.RT/0410339, 2004.

[MS05]           , Translation and shuffling of projectively presentable
          modules and a categorification of a parabolic Hecke module,
          Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 357 (2005), no. 7, 2939–2973.

[RC80]    A. Rocha-Caridi, Splitting criteria for g-modules induced from
          a parabolic and the Berňsteı̆n-Gel′ fand-Gel′ fand resolution of
          a finite-dimensional, irreducible g-module, Trans. Amer. Math.
          Soc. 262 (1980), no. 2, 335–366.

[Rin91]   C. M. Ringel, The category of modules with good filtrations over
          a quasi-hereditary algebra has almost split sequences, Math. Z.
          208 (1991), no. 2, 209–223.

[RVdB02] I. Reiten and M. Van den Bergh, Noetherian hereditary abelian
         categories satisfying Serre duality, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 15
         (2002), no. 2, 295–366 (electronic).

                                   42
[Soe90]    W. Soergel, Kategorie O, perverse Garben und Moduln über den
           Koinvarianten zur Weylgruppe, J. Amer. Math. Soc. 3 (1990),
           no. 2, 421–445.

[Soe97]           , Charakterformeln für Kipp-Moduln über Kac-Moody-
           Algebren, Represent. Theory 1 (1997), 115–132 (electronic).

[Str03a]   C. Stroppel, Category O: Gradings and Translation functors,
           Journal of Algebra 268 (2003), no. 1, 301–326.

[Str03b]           , Category O: quivers and endomorphism rings of pro-
           jectives, Represent. Theory 7 (2003), 322–345 (electronic).

[Str05]            , Categorification of the Temperley-Lieb category, tan-
           gles, and cobordisms via projective functors, Duke Math. J. 126
           (2005), no. 3, 547–596.

Volodymyr Mazorchuk, Department of Mathematics, Uppsala University,
Box 480, 751 06, Uppsala, SWEDEN,
e-mail: mazor@math.uu.se, web: “http://www.math.uu.se/˜mazor/”.
Catharina Stroppel, Department of Mathematics, University of Glasgow,
University Gardens, Glasgow G12 8QW, UK,
e-mail: cs@maths.gla.ac.uk




                                   43
