                                             ICM 2002 · Vol. III · 1–3




                                              Representations of Algebraic Groups and
arXiv:math/0304327v1 [math.RT] 22 Apr 2003




                                              Principal Bundles on Algebraic Varieties

                                                                           Vikram Bhagvandas Mehta∗

                                                                                        Abstract

                                                      In this talk we discuss the relations between representations of algebraic
                                                  groups and principal bundles on algebraic varieties, especially in characteristic
                                                  p. We quickly review the notions of stable and semistable vector bundles and
                                                  principal G-bundles , where G is any semisimple group. We define the notion
                                                  of a low height representation in characteristic p and outline a proof of the
                                                  theorem that a bundle induced from a semistable bundle by a low height
                                                  representation is again semistable. We include applications of this result to
                                                  the following questions in characteristic p:
                                                      1) Existence of the moduli spaces of semistable G-bundles on curves.
                                                      2) Rationality of the canonical parabolic for nonsemistable principal bun-
                                                  dles on curves.
                                                      3) Luna’s etale slice theorem.
                                                      We outline an application of a recent result of Hashimoto to study the
                                                  singularities of the moduli spaces in (1) above, as well as when these spaces
                                                  specialize correctly from characteristic 0 to characteristic p. We also discuss
                                                  the results of Laszlo-Beauville-Sorger and Kumar-Narasimhan on the Picard
                                                  group of these spaces. This is combined with the work of Hara and Srinivas-
                                                  Mehta to show that these moduli spaces are F -split for p very large. We
                                                  conclude by listing some open problems, in particular the problem of refining
                                                  the bounds on the primes involved.

                                                  2000 Mathematics Subject Classification: 22E46, 14D20.
                                                  Keywords and Phrases: Semistable bundles, Low-height representations.




                                             1.    Some Definitions
                                                  We begin with some basic definitions:

                                                  Let V be a vector bundle on a smooth projective curve X of genus g over an
                                             algebraically closed field (in any characteristic).
                                               ∗ Tata   Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai, India. E-mail: vikram@math.tifr.res.in
630                            Vikram Bhagvandas Mehta


Definition 1.1: V is stable ( respectively semi-stable) if for all subbundles W of
V , we have
                                =
                        µ(W ) def deg W/rk W < (≤)
                                       =
                                µ(V ) def deg V /rk V.


For integers r and d with r > 0, one constructs the moduli spaces U s (r, d)(U (r, d)) of
stable (semistable) vector bundles of rank r and degree d, using Geometric Invariant
Theory (G.I.T.).
      If the ground field is C, the complex numbers, one has the basic (genus X ≥ 2):
Theorem 1.2: Let V have degree 0. Then V is stable ⇔ V ≃ Vσ , for some
irreducible representation σ : π1 (X) → U (n).
      This is due to Narasimhan-Seshadri. Note that H → X is a principal π1 (X)
fibration, where H is the upper-half plane. Any σ : π1 (X) → GL(n, C) gives a
vector bundle of rank n on X, Vσ = H ×π1 (X) Cn .
Remark 1.3: It follows from Theorem 1.2 that if V is a semistable bundle on a
curve X over C, then ⊗n (V ), S n (V ), in fact any bundle induced from V is again
semistable. By Lefschetz, this holds for any algebraically closed field of character-
istic 0.
Remark 1.4: In general, a subbundle W of a vector bundle V is a reduction
of the structure group of the principal bundle of V to a maximal parabolic of
GL(n), n = rank V . This is in turn equivalent to a section σ of the associated fibre
space:
                                  E ×GL(n) GL(n)/P.
                                           π
Now let X be a smooth curve and E → X a principal G-bundle on X, where G is
a semisimple (or even a reductive) group in any characteristic.
Definition 1.5: E is stable (semistable) ⇔ ∀ maximal parabolics P of G, ∀ sections
σ of E(G/P ), we have degree σ # Tπ > 0(≥ 0), where Tπ is the relative tangent
                     π
bundle of E(G/P ) → X.
      Over C, we have the following [18]:
Theorem 1.6: E → X is stable ⇔ E ≃ Eσ for some irreducible representation
σ : π1 (X) → K, the maximal compact of G.
      The analogue of Remark 1.3 is valid in this general situation.
Remark 1.7: One can analogously define stable and semistable vector bundles
and principal bundles on normal projective varieties of dimension > 1. Again, in
characteristic 0, bundles induced from semistable bundles continue to be semistable.
Remark 1.8: In characteristic p, bundles induced from semistable bundles need
not be semistable, in general[7]. In this lecture we shall examine some conditions
when this does hold, and also discuss some applications to the moduli spaces of
principal G-bundles on curves.


2.     Low height representations
           Representations of Algebraic Groups and Principal Bundles                631


      Here we introduce the basic notion of a low height representation in charac-
teristic p. Let f : G → SL(n) = SL(V ) be a representation of G in char p, G
being reductive. Fix a Borel B and a Torus T in G. Let L(λi ), 1 ≤ i ≤ m, be
the simple
       X G-modules occurring in the Jordan-Holder filtration of V . Write each
λi as     qij αj , where {αj } is the system of simple roots corresponding to B and
       j
                               X
qij ∈ Q ∀i, j. Define htλi =       qij . Then one has the basic [9,20]:
                               j
Definition 2.1: f is a low-height representation of G, or V is a low-height module
over G, if 2ht(λi ) < p ∀i.
Remark 2.2: If 2ht(λi ) < p ∀i, then it easily follows that V is a completely
reducible G-module. In fact for any subgroup Γ of G, V is completely reducible
over Γ ⇔ Γ itself is completely reducible in G. By definition, an abstract subgroup
Γ of G is completely reducible in G ⇔ for any parabolic P of G, if Γ is contained
in P then Γ is contained in a Levi component L of P . These results were proved
by Serre[20] using the notion of a saturated subgroup of G.
     In general, denote sup (2ht λi ) by htG V . If V is the standard SL(n) module,
then htSL(n) ∧i (V ) = i(n−i), 1 ≤ i ≤ n−1. More generally, htG (V1 ⊗V2 ) = htG V1 +
htG V2 . The following theorem is the key link between low-height representations
and semistability of induced bundles [9]:
Theorem 2.3: Let E → X be a semistable G-bundle, where G is semisimple and
the base X is a normal projective variety. Let f : G → SL(n) be a low-height
representation. Then the induced bundle E(SL(n)) is again semistable.
     The proof is an interplay between the results of Bogomolov, Kempf, Rousseau
and Kirwan in G.I.T. on one hand and the results of Serre mentioned earlier on the
other. The group scheme E(G) over X acts on E(SL(n)/P ) and assume that σ is
a section of the latter. Consider the generic point K of X and its algebraic closure
K. Then E(G)K acts on E(SL(n)/P )K , and σ is a K-rational point of the latter.
There are 2 possibilities:
  1) σ is G.I.T semistable. In this case, one can easily prove that deg σ # Tπ ≥ 0.
  2) σ is G.I.T. unstable, i.e., not semistable. Let P (σ) be the Kempf-Rousseau
     parabolic for σ, which is defined over K. For deg σ # Tπ to be ≥ 0 it is sufficient
     that P (σ) is defined over K. Note that since V is a low-height representation
     of G, one has p ≥ h. One then has ([20]).

Proposition 2.4:         If p ≥ h, there is a unique G-invariant isomorphism log:
Gu → gnilp , where Gu is the unipotent variety of G and g nilp is the nilpotent variety
of g = Lie G.
     Proposition 2.4 is used in
Proposition 2.5: Let H be any semisimple group and W a low-height representa-
tion of H. Let W1 ⊂ W and assume that ∃X ∈ Lie H, X nilpotent such that X ∈
Lie (Stab (W1 )). Then in fact one has X ∈ Lie [Stab (W1 )red ].
     Along with some facts from G.I.T , Proposition 2.5 enables us to prove that
P (σ) is in fact defined over K, thus finishing the sketch of the proof of Theorem 2.3.
See also Ramanathan-Ramanan [19]. One application of low-height representations
632                            Vikram Bhagvandas Mehta


is in the proof of a conjecture of Behrend on the rationality of the canonical parabolic
or the instability parabolic. If V is a nonsemistable bundle on a variety X, then
one can show that there exists a flag V · ,

                           0 = V0 ⊂ V1 ⊂ V2 · · · ⊂ Vn = V

of subbundles of V with the properties:
 (1) Each Vi /Vi−1 is semistable and µ (Vi /Vi−1 ) > µ (Vi+1 /Vi ), 1 ≤ i ≤ n − 1.
 (2) The flag V · as in (1) is unique and infinitesimally unique, i.e., V · is defined
     over any field of definition of X and V . Such a flag corresponds to a reduction
     to a parabolic P of GL(n) and properties (1) and (2) may be expressed as
     follows: the elementary vector bundles on X associated to P all have positive
     degree and H 0 (X, E(g)/E(p)) = 0, where g = Lie GL(n) and p = Lie P .

      One may ask whether there is a such a canonical reduction for a nonsemistable
principal G bundle E → X. Such a reduction was first asserted first by Ramanathan
[18], and then by Atiyah-Bott[1] ,both over C and both without proofs. It was
Behrend [ 5 ], who first proved the existence and uniqueness of the canonical reduc-
tion to the instability parabolic in all characteristics. Further, Behrend conjectured
that H 0 (X, E(g)/E(p)) = 0.
      In characteristic zero, one can check that all three definitions of the instability
parabolic coincide and that Behrend’s conjecture is valid. In characteristic p, one
uses low-height representations to show the equality of the three definitions and
prove Behrend’s conjecture [14].
Theorem 2.6: Let E → X be a nonsemistable principal G-bundle in char p. As-
sume that p > 2dimG. Then all the 3 definitions coincide and further we have
H 0 (X, E(g)/E(p)) = 0, where p = Lie P and P is the instability parabolic.

     Theorem 2.6 is useful, among other things, for classifying principal G-bundles
on P1 and P2 in characteristic p.

       If V is a finite-dimensional representation of a semisimple group G (in any
characteristic), then the G.I.T. quotient V //G parametrizes the closed orbits in V .
Now, let the characteristic be zero and let v0 ∈ V have a closed orbit. Then Luna’s
étale slice theorem says that ∃ a locally closed non-singular subvariety S of V such
that v0 ∈ S and S//Gvo is isomorphic to V //G, locally at v0 , in the étale topology.
Here Gv0 is the stabilizer of v0 . The proof uses the fact that Gv0 is a reductive
subgroup of G (not necessarily connected!), hence V is a completely reducible G
module. In characteristic p, one has to assume that V is a low-ht representation
of G. Then the conclusion of Luna’s étale slice theorem is still valid: to be more
precise, let V be a low-ht representation of G and let v0 ∈ V have a closed orbit.
Put H = Stab (v0 ). The essential point, as in characteristic 0, is to prove the
complete reducibility of V over H. Using the low-ht assumption, one shows that
every X ∈ Lie H with X nilpotent can be integrated to a homomorphism Ga → H
with tangent vector X. Now, under the hypothesis of low-ht, one shows that Hred
                                                0
is a saturated subgroup of G and (Hred : Hred      ) is prime to p. This shows that V
         Representations of Algebraic Groups and Principal Bundles              633


is a completely reducible Hred module. Further, one shows that Hred is a normal
subgroup of H with H/Hred a finite group of multiplicative type, i.e. a finite
subgroup of a torus. Now the complete reducibility of V over H follows easily [11].
Just as in characteristic zero, one deduces the existence of a smooth H-invariant
subvariety S of V such that v0 ∈ S and S//H is locally isomorphic to V //G at v0 .
This result is used in the construction of the moduli space MG to be described in
the next section.


3.    Construction of the moduli spaces
      The moduli spaces of semistable G-bundles on curves were first constructed by
Ramanathan over C [16,17], then by Faltings and Balaji-Seshadri in characteristic
0 [3,6]. There are 3 main points in Ramanathan’s construction:
   1. If E → X is semistable, then the adjoint bundle E(g) is semistable.
   2. If E → X is polystable, then E(g) is also polystable.
   3. A semisimple Lie Algebra in char 0 is rigid.
      The construction of MG in char p was carried out in [2,15]. We describe
the method of [15] first : points (1) and (2) are handled by Theorem 2.3 and the
following [11] :
Theorem 3.1: Let E → X be a polystable G-bundle over a curve in char p. Let
σ : G → SL(n) = SL(V ) be a representation such that all the exterior powers
∧i V, 1 ≤ i ≤ n − 1, are low-height representations. Then the induced bundle E(V )
is also polystable.
      The proof uses Luna’s étale slice theorem in char p and Theorem 2.3.
      Now one takes a total family T of semistable G bundle on X and takes the
good quotient of T to obtain MG in char p. Theorem 3.1 is used to identify the
closed points of MG as the isomorphism classes of polystable G-bundles, just as in
char 0. The semistable reduction theorem is proved by lifting to characteristic 0
and then applying Ramanathan’s proof (in which (3) above plays a crucial role).
This construction follows Ramanathan very closely and, as is clear, one has to make
low-height assumptions as in Theorem 3.1.
      The method of [2] follows the one in [3] with some technical and conceptual
changes. One chooses an embedding G → SL(n) and a representation W for SL(n)
such that (1) G is the stabilizer of some w0 ∈ W . (2) W is a “low separable index
representation” of SL(n), i.e., all stabilizers are reduced and W is low-height over
SL(n). The semistable reduction theorem is proved using the theory of Bruhat-Tits.
Here also suitable low-height assumptions have to be made.


4.    Singularities and specialization of the moduli
      spaces
     We first discuss the singularities of MG , assuming throughout that G is simply
connected. In char 0, MG has rational singularities, this follows from Boutot’s
theorem. In char p, the following theorem due to Hashimoto [8] is relevant:
634                           Vikram Bhagvandas Mehta


Theorem 4.1: Let V be a representation of G such that all the symmetric powers
S n (V ) have a good filtration. Then the ring of invariant [S · (V )]G is strongly F -
regular.
      Strongly F -regularity is a notion in the theory of tight closure in commutative
algebra. We just note that if a geometric domain is strongly F -regular then it
is normal,Cohen-Macaulay, F -split and has “rational-like” singularities. Now let
t ∈ MG be the “worst point”, i.e., the trivial G-bundle on X.
      The local ring (OMG , t)∧ is isomorphic to (S · (W )//G)∧ , where W = direct
sum of g copies of g, with G acting diagonally. If p is a good prime for G , then
Hashimoto’s theorem implies that OMG ,t is strongly F -regular. The other points of
MG are not so well understood. This would require a detailed study of the automor-
phism groups of polystable bundles, both in char 0 and p, and of their invariants
of the slice representations. This is necessary also to study the specialization prob-
lem, i.e., when MG in char 0 specializes to MG in char p. One has to show that
the invariants of the slice representations in char 0 specialize to the invariants in
char p. However for G=SL(n),the situation is much simpler. One can write down
the automorphism group of a polystable bundle and its representation on the local
moduli space. Consequently, one expects the moduli spaces to specialize correctly
and that the local rings of MG are strongly F -regular in all positive characteristics.
      We briefly discuss Pic MG in char 0. It follows from [4,10] that MG has the
following properties in char 0:
  1. Pic MG ≃ Z.
  2. MG is a normal projective, Gorenstein variety with rational singularities and
     with K negative ample.

      Now let X be a normal,Cohen-Macaulay variety in char 0. It is proved in
[13],in response to a conjecture of Karen Smith, that if X has rational singularities,
then the reduction of X mod p is F -rational for all large p. This result together
with 1 and 2 above imply that MG reduced mod p is F -split for all large p. We
cannot give effective bounds on the primes involved. One partial result is known in
this direction[12].
Acknowledgement: I would like to thank my colleagues S. Ilangovan, A.J. Parame-
swaran and S. Subramanian for their help in preparing this report and T.T. Nayya
and H for constant help and encouragement.


References
 [1] M.F. Atiyah, R. Bott, The Yang-Mills equations over Riemann Surfaces, Phil.
     Trans. R. Soc. London A 308 (1982), 523–615.
 [2] V. Balaji, A.J. Parameswaran Semistable Principal Bundles-II (in positive
     characteristics) to appear in Transformation Groups.
 [3] V. Balaji, C.S. Seshadri Semistable Principal Bundles-I (in characteristic zero),
     to appear in Journal of Algebra.
 [4] A. Beauville, Y. Laszlo, C. Sorger, The Picard Group of the moduli of G-
     bundles over curves, Compositio Math. 112, (1998), No.2, 183–216.
         Representations of Algebraic Groups and Principal Bundles              635


 [5] K. Behrend, Semistability of reductive group schemes over curves, Math. Ann.
     301 (1995), 281–305.
 [6] G. Faltings, Stable G-bundles and projective connections, J. Algebraic Geom.
     2 (1993) No.3, 507–568.
 [7] D. Gieseker, Stable Vector Bundles and the Frobenius morphism, Ann. Sci.
     Ecol. Nor. Sup. 6, (1973).
 [8] M. Hashimoto, Good filtrations of symmetric algebras and strong F -regularity
     of invariant subrings, Math. Z. 236 (2001), No.3, 605–623.
 [9] S. Ilangovan, V.B. Mehta, A.J. Parameswaran, Semistability and Semisimplic-
     ity in representations of low-height in positive characteristics, preprint.
[10] S. Kumar, M.S. Narasimhan, Picard group of the moduli spaces of G-bundles,
     Math. Ann. 308, (1997), No.1, 155–173.
[11] V.B. Mehta, A.J. Parameswaran, Geometry of low-height representations, Pro-
     ceedings of the International Colloquium on Algebra, Arithmetic and Geometry,
     (ed. R. Parimala), TIFR Mumbai 2000.
[12] V.B. Mehta, T.R. Ramadas, Moduli of vector bundles, Frobenius splitting and
     invariant theory, Ann. of Math. (2) 144, (1996), 269–313.
[13] V.B. Mehta, V. Srinivas, A characterization of rational singularities, Asian J.
     Math., Vol.1, (1997), No.2, 249–271,.
[14] V.B. Mehta, S. Subramanian, On the Harder-Narasimhan Filtration of Prin-
     cipal Bundles, Proceedings of the International Colloquium on Algebra, Arith-
     metic and Geometry, (ed. R. Parimala), TIFR Mumbai 2000.
[15] V.B. Mehta, S. Subramanian, Moduli of Principal G-bundles on curves in pos-
     itive characteristic, in preparation.
[16] A. Ramanathan, Moduli for principal bundles over algebraic curves I, Proc.
     Indian Acad. Sci. Math. Sci., 106, (1996), No.3, 301–328.
[17] A. Ramanathan, Moduli for principal bundles over algebraic curves II, Proc.
     Indian Acad. Sci. Math. Sci., 106 (1996), No.4, 421–449.
[18] A. Ramanathan, Moduli for principal bundles, in: Algebraic Geometry, Pro-
     ceedings, Copenhagen 1978, 527–533, Lecture Notes in Mathematics vol. 732,
     Springer.
[19] S. Ramanan, A. Ramanathan, Some remarks on the instability flag, Tohoku
     Math. Journal 36, (1984), 269–291.
[20] J-P. Serre, Moursund Lectures, University of Oregon Mathematics Department,
     notes by W.E. Duckworth (1998).
